ficha MOKHTARI Institut dInformatique USTHB BP 32 El Alia Alger Algdrie mokhtari @ist .ibp.dz  Daniel KAYSER LIPN URA 1507 du CNRS Institut GalilCe Universitk Paris-Nord 93430 Villetaneuse France Daniel.Kayser@ural507.univ-paris 13.fr  Abstract  inferences can be achieved without ever making that choice (see e.g.
[4]), we adopt in this paper a pointbased point of view, for reasons which will appear in the next section.
However, it is likely that an interpretation in terms of intervals of what we call below time points would not change drastically the core of our approach.
The next section motivates our choices, in order to satisfy the kind of reasoning we wish to capture.
We then go on to provide a formalism intended to link an incomplete description with any normal course of the world: we give preliminary notations and definitions, then describe a theory of action, and compare it with related works.
We conclude with a discussion about current and future work.
This paper discusses the temporal aspect of a causal theory based on an "interventionist" conception of causality, i.e.
a preference to select causes among a set of actions which an agent has the ability to perform or not to perform (free will).
Casting causal reasoning in this framework leads to explore the problem of reasoning about actions, generally considered as a nonmonotonic temporal reasoning.
Most of the works on nonmonotonic temporal reasoning have used simple temporal ontologies, such as situation calculus, or temporal logic with discrete time.
The theory presented in this paper also has a simple temporal ontology based on "time points" organized on branching "time lines ", with the possibility of modelling continuous evolutions of the world for various fitures (prediction) or pasts (diagnostic).
2.
Actions, effects, and time points Actions and effects will be the only temporal propositions considered in our framework.
An effect can be, among other things, an event or a fact.
But as argued in [13], a fine distinction is unnecessary.
In order to introduce temporal aspects, some choices must be made.
The first one concerns the basic temporal element: point or interval ?
Intervals can be related in various ways: "I1 is completely before 12"; "I1 abuts I2", "I1 overlaps I2", etc.[l].
All these relations are possible between a cause and an effect, but they are subsumed by the general principle, according to which effects never precede their causes; therefore we find it simpler to use only t i m e points.
We do not mean to reduce causation merely to a temporal relationship: what we present below shows the contrary.
Let us mention, in addition, that most approaches choose discrete sets, isomorphic to integers, to represent time.
In order to better reflect our intuitions on continuity, we prefer to take reals, but we do not consider this choice as critical,  1.
Introduction A definition of the concept of cause, if at all possible, would involve deep philosophical questions ; we do not need to tackle them, however, in order to use a practical notion of cause.
Intuitively, this notion is necessary in our everyday reasoning, both to anticipate what should happen if we decide to perform an action, and to diagnose what might have happened to yield a given state of affairs.
We propose to prune the collection of propositions which might be considered as causes by preferring to take as causes the result of the free will of an agent, i.e.
hidher ability to opt for performing or not performing a given action.
Casting causal reasoning in this framework leads to explore the problem of reasoning about actions, generally considered to be a nonmonotonic (i.e.
defeasible) temporal reasoning.
Temporal reasoning is said to require a choice among two ontologies : point-based or intervalbased.
Although we consider that many non-trivial  14 0-8186-7528/96 $5.00 0 1996 IEEE  the result of causal relations.
The possibility of having a branching past implies that the "interesting propositions" do not include "historical" statements, since otherwise different pasts could never lead to the same time point.
Having time points defined both by the subset of true propositions and by the date allows to distinguish several occurrcnces of the same state of affairs.
If we need to represent cyclic phenomena, where this distinction is useless, we may add an equivalence relation on time points: t l E t2 if they differ only by their date, and then reason on the quotient set.
The alternative, i.e.
define time points only by the subset of true propositions, does not allow to restore the notion of date when needed.
To extract the date of a time point, we define a function date : T I+ 93 which maps every time point on a real number representing its date.
To simplify, we write date(t) as dt.
especially as our examples need only to consider a finite number of time points.
Our second choice amounts to select either a linear or a branching model of time; time is intuitively linear.
However, as we deal with choice making, the very representation of a choice immediately suggests the use of branching time.
Among the time points, some particular ones, called choice points, are intended to represent states of affairs where an agent can take the decision of performing or not an action: obviously, not all time points are choice points, since the conditions allowing for the action are not always satisfied.
The decision of the agent is represented as a time line splitting into two futures, or more accurately, as two distinct time lines having the same time points up to the choice point.
This is consonant with most systems, which have a branching future [lo].
But we consider as well a branching past [14], because we often need to examine two different courses of events leading to the same situation.
We also allow time lines to meet again in the future (case of an action without long-range effects, for example).
Fig.
1 below will provide an illustration.
We now present more formally the general framework corresponding to our choices.
Definition 2: We call time line 1 (somehow similarly to McDermott's "chronicle" [IO]) a set of time points in bijection with the set of dates, meant to represent a possible evolution of the universe.
A time line hence conveys the complete evolution of the truth value of the "interesting propositions".
The time points of a time line are supposed to comply with the general principle: "there is no effect without a cause".
Their propositions are then the result of cause-effect relations governed by causal rules.
The set of causal rules is gathered in a rule base called BR.
The time points of a time line are totally ordered by a precedence relation written "I",where tKt2 means that time point t2 does not precede t l , hence whenever tlSt2 we have dtlSdt2, but the converse does not hold (see Fig.1).
3.
Temporal ontology Definition 1: A time point t is a "snapshot" state of the universe defined by a subset of true propositions at a certain date and by this date.
T is the set of time points.
The subset mentioned in the definition is not arbitrary: we sometimes refer to it as the set of "interesting propositions", i.e.
in our framework,  15  dO  d2  dl  Figure 1: the structure of branching time in the past and in the future.
The thick line represents a time line, I, including among others time points to, t i , t2.
The other curved lines represent other time lines.
tO c tl c t2 holds, as do tO < t"2 and t i < t'2, but there is no relation between t i and t"2, although dtl< d t y is true.
- L is the set of time lines, 4.
The language  -  3 is the set of real numbers, if t has exactly as  - t E 1 is true in the model  its true propositions the set I(l,dt), - v(p,l,dt) is true in the model iff p E Z(l,dt), i.e.
proposition p is true at the time point determined by time line 1 and date dt.
It follows that nocc(p,l,dt,A) is true in the model iff (b't') ((t'E1 A dtld&+A) p 6i Z(1,dtt)).
The proposed langage A!
is defined at two levels: * the first level is meant to represent static information.
It is a plain propositional language in which: P is a set of propositions we are interested in, A, subset of P, is a set of actions, and E, subset of P, is a set of effects, with A n E = 0 and A v E = P. the second level expresses dynamic information.
It contains predicates with time variables.
If p is a formula of the first level, I a time line, t E 1 a time point, a formula of the second level has the form: - v(p, I , d t ) with the intended meaning that formula p is true in 1 at the date of time point t, and: - nocc(p,l,d,A) with the intended meaning that p is never true in line 1 from the date of time point t on, during the delay A.
In other words, nocc(p,l,dt,A) is a short-hand for : (Vt') ((t'E I A O 2 d t d f < A) 3 -~V(p,Z,df))  =I  The dependence of the effect on the cause may vary according to the context.
We shall therefore introduce a subset of preferred time lines and augment the language with an operator denoted "a'' meaning normally implies (in a more comprehensive presentation, see [ 111, we also have an operator "-+" meaning implies in all cases).
The intuitive idea behind these two new notions is as follows: when an agent chooses to perform an action, he or she does not anticipate every possible outcome of his or her choice: several circumstances, unknown to, or neglected by, the agent at the moment of the choice, may alter the predictable effect of the action.
Informally, the "preferred" time lines are the futures that the agent normally "had in mind" when he or she opted to perform the action.
The effects which are present in all "preferred time lines" following an action are said to be "normally implied" by the action.
The idea of "normal implication" is inspired by the work of  We are going to extend gradually this language, but first let us define its semantics.
The associated model theory is a generalization of Kripke [8] possible world semantics.
In this model, an interpretation is defined as function I mapping the Cartesian product L X % into a subset of propositions, i.e.
Z : L X 93 I+ 2 p , where:  16  Delgrande [3].
We defer a more precise explanation until we introduce some more notions.
To make sense of the notion of "normality" requires to reason with uncertain information: in the absence of specific information, we are entitled to believe that things behave normally.
This brings us to a problem similar to the well-known "frame problem", which is inherent to any theory of change.
We must therefore take into account: the preconditions of an action a , i.e.
represent what is reasonable to assume whenever performing a is considered; the hindrances of an action a, i.e.
represent the effects of other actions that can inhibit the effects of a; the persistence of states, corresponding to the fact that some propositions continue to hold true for some duration, unless an external event entails their falsity.
All these aspects generally require the use of a nonmonotonic reasoning.
That is the reason why we devote next section to this issue.
time line, as we introduced it in 54.
Its definition requires the preliminary notion of coincidence, viz.
Definition 3: Two time lines  11 and 12 coincide up to time point t, property written coincide(ll,12,t) ifffor every time point t'preceding t, t' E 11 = t' E 12.
In other words, a model satisfies coincide (Zi, 12,t) iff (b't')(t'lt 2 Z(ll, dti)=Z(12,dtl))  Definition 4: The set of preferred time lines for line 1 ut time point t, noted Lp(1,dt) is a subset of L obtained by a function Lp :L X 3'I+ 2L such that: (Vl,l',t) (I' E Lp(l,dt) 3 coincide(l,l',t)) We are now in position to define formally normal implication:  Definition 5: Action a normally implies effect e within the delay A, noted a 3 e [A], ifs (Vl,t ) ( C l A C2) where C1 and C2 stand for the following conditions: C1 {tv(a,Wt) A (YP)(pcnorm(a)3 v ( p , W t ) ) l 3 { Vl') (l'sLp(1,dt)I> [(dt') (t'sl' A dtldt.ldt+A A v(e,l',dt~))v (3e',t") (e'EUR inhibit(e,a) A t"s1' A v(e',l ',dy)A dt.GQGit+A)l)} C2 { v ( - r a , l , d t ) I> (31') ( I ' E L p ( l , d t ) A noccte,l',dt,A))J  5.
Nonmonotonicity In [ l l ] , we show how to include implicit premises in a normal inference.
We suppose the existence of a function, called norm, to define the normal conditions under which an action is executed.
Technically, norm : A I+ 2p is such that for any action a , n o r m ( a ) contains those propositions (preconditions) which are true unless otherwise specified when an agent considers to perform a.
Extending the domain of norm to our "first-level" language, i.e.
defining compositionally norm (a op a') where op is a boolean operator is not a trivial task, if we want to remain compatible with our intuitions.
We will not treat this problem here.
As we saw the importance of defining "hindrances", we suppose similarly the existence of a function inhibit that, for any couple <e,a> where e is a normal effect of a, determines the events which are liable to prevent e from following a .
Technically, inhibit : E X A + 2E is such that inhibit(e,a) is the subset E' of E where e' E E' iff whenever e' occurs during the delay after a where e should turn true, e may actually remain false.
Notice that action a' causing e' may happen before, with, or after a.
Similarly, extending the domain of inhibit to couples of formulas instead of couples of atoms is a very thorny issue.
We turn now to what we mean by "normal case".
This notion is often attached to a preference ordering, but we notice that the definition of a socalled "correct order" is rather difficult; therefore, we find it more convenient to use the notion of preferred  This rather intricate definition calls for some explanations: C1 tells that whenever a occurs under normal conditions, in all preferred futures, either there exists a subsequent occurrence of event e within the delay A, or there is an occurrence of event e' known to inhibit the effect of a ; e' must then occur after t within the prescribed delay (notice that, even in this case, e may become true); C2 checks that if a is not executed, there exists at least one preferred future in which e will not occur within the specified delay A.
This condition reflects the implicit counterfactuality always present in causation: we are not ready to say that a normally implies e if we think that, even without performing a, e will nevertheless occur in every likely future.
We now turn to the last problem related with the "frame problem", namely persistence.
Example 1: Suppose that the following facts and rule are given.
They represent the well-known "Yale Shooting Problem" (Y.S.P.)
according to our no tation: - v(Fred is alive,l,dto) - v(gun is loaded,l,dtl)  17  one in which the action is performed, the other in which it is not.
The free will of the agent is exactly histher ability to choose which of these two lines will correspond to reality.
- v(shoot at Fred,l,dt2) - shoot at Fred lalive Fred [A]  *  with dtoldt11dt2 and A: a few seconds.
Two problems have to be considered in relation with the persistence of a given event e: 1. temporal nonmonotonicity, i.e.
the possibility that an external event prevents e from remaining true, and 2. the estimation of the duration of the persistence of a fact, i.e.
how long, after e has begun to be true, is it likely that it is still true ?
Suppose that we heve the answer to point 2., and let a be the "normal duration" of fact e. We can define persistence as follows:  Definition 7: t is called a choice point relative to action a, among lines 11 and 12 {noted pchoix(a,11,12,t)) iff ( V t ' ) ((t'<t 3 coincide (11,12,t')) A v(a,li,dt) A v(-a,L2,dt)) The set of causal rules BR and the definitions provided so far allow us to define the set of voluntary causes of an effect e observed on time line I' at time point t':  Definition 6 (persistence): We note persist(e,d)  Definition 8: the voluntary causes are defined as a partial function: causev .
E x L x T + 2A defined only if v(e,l',dtf)holds.
Then, causev (e,l',t') is the subset A ' of A such that U E A ' iff a satisfies conditions C K 4 (the scope of t and 1 extends from C2 to C4, and of A includes C1 and C2): C l ( 3 A ) (a 3 e[A] E BR) C2 (3t,1,1") (pchoix(a,1, l",t) A dt_<ti_<t+RelevantDelay), where: if ( 33) (persist(e, 3) E TP) then Relevant-Delay = A + delse Relevant-Delay = A, c3 1'E Lp(1,dt) C4 v( T e ,1,d,) .
the fact that, without any external influence, event e is believed to remain true for a duration d. We have: (t'E1 A persist(e,d) 2 {Vto,l) ((v(e,l,dto)A (3') nocc(e,l,t',dt,-dtI))) 3 {Vl',t) ( ( t e l l A C1 A C2 A C3) 3 v(e,l',dt))) where C l , C2, and C3 abbreviate the following conditions: C1 I'E Lp(1,dtO) C2 dtoldtldto+ d 7 e [ A ] ) ~ B RI> nocc(a',l',dto-A, C3 { Va',A) ((a' dt-dto+A)) to is the time point where fact e becomes true in time line 1; C1 expresses that persistence is predicted at least in the preferred futures; C2, that persistence lasts at least for (without prohibiting it beyond this duration), provided that no action a', known in B R to make e false, occurs during the relevant lapse (C3).
(We cannot use the function inhibit here, since we want the persistence of an event to be defined without reference to its cause, while inhibit defines a set of events related to both a cause and its effect).
In the same way as implications are gathered in a rule base BR, the known persistences are collected in a "table of persistences" TP.
We now have all the prerequisites necessary to investigate which set of actions can reasonably be held as causally responsible for a given event e.  C1 selects the set of causal rules of B R containing the effect e in their right part (we examine in [ 111 the possibility of exploring what we call closure(BR) instead of BR, in order to take into account the actions which are known to cause an effect e ' , of which e is a tautological consequence); C2 means that the agent had the choice (at a time which is relevant for the observation of e ) between doing and not doing action a, and that he or she chose to do a ... C3 ... in a time line 1 for which time line I' (where event e has actually occurred) is among the preferred futures at the time where the choice has been made; C4 specifies the relevance of the action to the observed event: e must not already be true at the moment of executing a in 1.  a  6.
Explanation The reader should remember that the notion of action is essential in our theory, since we decided to privilege, when asked to find the causes of a state of - which we take to be actions executed by agents in virtue of their free will - over "natural laws".
We that a choice point is a time point from which stem (at least) two different time lines,  Suppose that we have a description of the evolution of a world by of a set D L of statements using the predicates and nocc.
The above definition can be used to solve the explanation problem, if we also have at our disposal general information such as BR and TP, and provided that some assumptions concerning the completeness of  18  DL are accepted.
[ll] gives further results, and  simultaneously providing the same result) and the fact that we require the actions to be instantaneous.
extends Definition 8 to the case where an operator + for "implies in all cases" is added.
8.
Conclusion  7, Related works  In this paper, we have developped:  - a simple temporal ontology,  Recent publications [ 12,151 contain thorough discussions of other approaches, namely chronological minimization [6,7,13] or causal minimisation [9].
They show why such approaches fail to handle adequately prediction, explanation, or ramification problems.
The aim of this section is not to restart these discussions.
However, we would like to show briefly how we tackle the central problem illustrated by the already mentionned Y.S.P.
To DL and BR given in section 5, we add TP containing the facts that alive and loaded persist indefinitely; we add also the fact that inhibit( - d i v e , shoot) contains facts like deviation-of-bullet and so on.
The conflict of persistence between alive and loaded does not arise in our approach.
As a matter of fact, the assumption of completeness on DL enables us to derive that no inhibiting fact prevents - d i v e to occur, once shoot has been done; therefore, we predict lalive.
If we also have a rule like shoot 4oaded in BR, definition 6 cannot be used to predict the persistence of loaded.
Knowing what belongs to inhibit(Tloaded, shoot) - or assuming this set to be empty, in the absence of any information on the subject -, we predict lloaded as well.
We now consider backward reasoning, adding to D L a statement such as v(Fred is alive,l,dt~)and dt2+A<dt3 : if we have to explain this anomalous state, our approach will consider two possible tracks to follow: the persistence of loaded has stopped (the gun has somehow become unloaded between dtl and dt2) or some inhibiting effect (e.g.
deviation-ofbullet) has occurred between the action shoot and its normal effect lalive, that is between dt2 and dt3.
However, we cannot prefer one track over the other, nor can we guess exactly when, in the intervals defined, the anomalous fact took place.
In contrast to this intuition, the chronological systems tend to prefer the sequence of world states where the gun becomes unloaded just before shooting, because this sequence postpones the change as long as it is consistent to do so.
More recent approaches [2,12,151 do not present these anomalies, but they should be augmented with the possibility of inhibiting effects after the action; otherwise, they are not able to propose the second kind of explanations.
Finally, the solution advocated for in this paper also runs into some difficulties.
An important one concerns concurrent actions (two or more actions  - the role of an agent in the evolution of the  world.
This approach seems to provide an intuitively correct analysis of the main problems encountered in the A.I.
literature: the explanation problem, the prediction problem, and the ramification problem (see [ 111 for examples).
Our approach should easily extend to the case where the first-level language is first-order.
We do not anticipate too many difficulties to take into account the duration of actions: instead of a threeplace predicate v(a,t,dt), we might abbreviate the formula: ( V t ) ( t l < t < t 2 3 v ( a , l , d t ) ) into v(a,1,dtl ,dt2), a four-place predicate.
This should also help us to handle the case of concurrent actions.
As another direction of further research, we are taking advantage of a cospus of car-crash reports, which is currently studied in our Laboratory [ 5 ] .The goal is to determine what should be put in BR and TP in order to find intuitively correct answers to questions concerning the causes of the accident.
As it is often the case in Artificial Intelligence, real-size problems reveal issues which are not even visible in toy problems, such as those which illustrate the present paper.
REFERENCES [l] James ALLEN: Towards a general theory of action and time.
Artificial Intelligence vo1.23 pp.
123-154,  1984 [2] A.B.BAKER: A simple solution to the Yale Shooting Problem.
Intern.
Con$ on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning pp.
11-20, 1989 [3] James P.DELGRANDE: A first-order conditional logic for prototypical properties.
Artificial Intelligence vo1.33 pp.105-130, 1987 Frangoise GAYRAL, Philippe GRANDEMANGE: Evtnements : ponctualitt et durativitt.
81hA F C E T RFIA Congress pp.905-910, Lyon (F), Nov. 1991 [5] Frangoise GAYRAL, Philippe GRANDEMANGE, Daniel KAYSER, FranGois LEVY: InterprCtation des constats d'accidents : reprksenter le rCel et le potentiel Approches se'maiztiques t.a.1.
vo1.35 n"1 pp.65-81, 1994 [6] B.A.HAUGH: Simple causal minimization for  [PI  temporal persistence and projection.
AAA1 pp.218223.
1987  19  [7] Henry A.KAUTZ: The logic of persistence.
Y h National Conference on Artificial Intelligence pp.401-  [12] Erik SANDEWALL: The range of applicability of nonmonotonic logics for the inertia problem.
13th IJCAI pp.738-743, Chambery, 1993 [I31 Yoav SHOHAM: Reasoning about change: time and causation from the standpoint of Artificial Intelligence.
M. I. T.Press 1988 [14] Yoav SHOHAM: Time for Action : On the Relation Between Time, Knowledge and Action.
l l t hIJCAI pp.954-959 & 1173, Detroit, 1989 [ 151 Lynn A.STEIN, Leora MORGENSTERN: Motivated action theory: a formal theory of causal reasoning.
Artificial Intelligence voI.7 1 pp.
1-42, 1994  405, 1986 [8] Saul A.KRIPKE: Semantical considerations on modal logic.
Acta philosophica fennica vo1.16 pp.8394, 1963 [9] Vladimir LIFSHITZ: Computing Circumscription.
9th IJCAI pp.121-127, Los Angeles, 1985 [ l o ] Drew V.McDERMOTT: A Temporal Logic for Reasoning about Processes and Plans.
Cognitive Science vo1.6 pp.101-155, 1982 [ 111 Aicha MOKHTARI: Action-based causal reasoning.
Applied Intelligence to appear  20