A Topological Transition Based Logic for the Qualitative Motion of Objects Denis Gag&  Andre5 Trudel  Alex Informatique 1930 rue Gagnon Lachine, Que, Canada H8T 3M6  Jodrey School of Computer Science Acadia University Wolfville, NS, Canada BOP 1x0 The first half of the paper describes the ontology.
The second half presents a first order axiomatization of it.
Abstract W e present a spatio-temporal ontology suitable for representing and reasoning about the qualitative motion of rigid bodies.
This simple ontology provides a uniform treatment of motion i n one, two, and three dimensional space.
A succinct axiomatization is provided capturing the ontology.
This first order logic as based on the transition of topological relations between objects.
1  2  Introduction  Most interesting real world problems have a temporal and spatial component.
Traditionally, these components have been studied in isolation.
There are few AI approaches that combine both space and time.
One useful application of such approaches is the study of motion in naive physics.
We are interested in the qualitative study of the motion and collision of objects in one, two, and three dimensional space.
We restrict our attention to ndimensional objects moving in n-dimensional space.
Namely, intervals in one dimension, planes in two dimension, and non-zero volume objects in three dimension.
We assume that the objects are convex and rigid.
We refer to the common sense notion of rigidity where objects tend to maintain their shape (e.g.
lines maintain their length, planes maintain their area, and non zero-volume objects maintain their volume).
This notion excludes liquids and gases.
Examples of rigid objects are bricks, balls, pencils, and cars.
We assume fluid motion.
An object's trajectory follows connected lines, and cannot disappear and reappear.
But, the trajectory may be erratic.
For example, the trajectory of a squash ball during a game.
An object is allowed to be at rest either permanently, or intermitently.
We are not interested in the relative directions of the objects.
For examplc, we do not distinguish between an object approaching another from the right and from the left.
What is important is that they are approaching each other and may collide.
When two objects collide, they can either repel (e.g., two billiard or go through one another (e.g., two cones of  I Relation I Symbol I Inverse 1 J  Precedes I Meets I Overlaps I Starts I During Finishes Kquals I  P m 0  S  d f eq  I  l  I  I I  Pl mi 01  s1  di fi  J  These relations can also be used to describe the one dimensional spatial relationships between two intervals.
Assume we have two intervals i and j in one dimensional space where at least one of the intervals is moving towards the other.
At impact, they either repel or go through each other.
If they repel one another, we get the sequence of relations shown in figure 1 A and B.
The arrowhead represents the direction of travel.
In sequence A, i approaches j from the left, and in B i approaches from the right.
In both A and B, they approach, collide, then move away.
Note that the relations are independent of the relative sizes of i a,nd j.
176 0-8186-7528f96 $5.00 0 1996 IEEE  Motion Tree  At the basis of our ontology are topological relations between objects in one, two and three dimensions.
We restrict our attention to n-dimensional objects moving in n-dimensional space.
The transition between topological relations leads to a uniform graphical representation for motion in ail three dimensions.
We represent motion with a common tree struture called a motion tree.
Nodes of a motion tree are spatial relationships, and the edges represent motion as the transition between relations.
The motion of objects must follow a path in the motion tree.
Below we present the motion tree for each dimension, then conclude the section with a description of motion tree properties.
2.1 One Dimensional Motion An interval is one ty e of object that populates one dimensional space.
In Yl], Allen identifies 13 possible relations between temporal intervals:  __c  A  __c  c  c  -  B,  ---c  m  P  P  .IC--  c  4  Pi  mi  Pi -.-c  -  c  D,  --c  mi  Pi  E  c  c  m  P  c  c  mormi  :...I.
I  :  .
/ \  ___c  c  c  t  oi  mi  : C,D  E,F  I  Pi  P or pi  .
m o r mi  : :  I I  A  .
:  o or oi  a:  ./ s or si or f o r fi  : sorsiorforfi  I  I d or di  si  m o r mi  !
..: o or oi  s or si or f o r fi  c  P  ___c  p or pi +  .
P or Pi( A,B: I .
:  t  di  fi  0  ----c  m  __c  - _ _ I .
-  c  4  0  __c  Pi  -  *  oi  ___c  ____)  mi  .
c  Lc  c  t  oi c  -c  4  c .
d or di  Figure 1: 1-D Example  177  .\ .'
'  A specific example of two dimensional motion is shown at the top of figure 4.
Here we have two identical size circles of light crossing paths.
As in one dimensional space, the motion of two objects must follow a path in the motion tree in figure 2(b).
For example, the specific path for the collision at the top of figure 4 is depicted by the dotted line in the motion tree at the bottom of the same figure.
2.3 Three Dimensional Motion For the three dimensional case, we have two rigid, convex, non-zero volume objects.
The spatia] relations are the same as in the two dimensional case.
The motion tree is also identical (i.e., the tree in figure 2(b)).
A 3-dimensional example is shown at the top of figure 5 , where two billiard balls come into collision.
The path traversed by this example in the motion tree is represented by the dotted line in the tree at the bottom of the same figure.
2.4 Observations Except for the node labels, the motion trees are identical in all three dimensions.
For the sake of uniformity, we define a generic motion tree and use it in the remainder of the paper.
The generic tree is shown in figure 2 (c).
The nodes in the generic tree represent the spatial relations shown in table 1.
The node INST is shorthand for "INSide and Touching a boundary", and INS for "completely INSide" .
Motion must follow a path in the motion tree.
Note that the path only captures motion.
Given a path, we cannot infer the relative sizes or directions of the objects.
Oscillations can occur within the motion tree.
For example, consider shaking a ball which contains a smaller ball.
We get an oscillation between INST and INS.
If at impact i and j go through one another, we have two sub-cases to consider.
Either the intervals are equal or different in size.
If i and j are equal, we get the sequence of relations shown in figure 1 C and D. In C i approaches from the left, and from the right in D.Note that the middle relation is eq.
The sequences in figure 1 E and F show the subcase where i and j are of different lengths.
In both E and F, i approaches from the left.
For i approaching from the right, we simply read the sequence E and F backwards (and reverse the arrow directions).
There are similarities between the sequences A-F.
They all begin and end with p or pi.
The second and penultimate relation is m or mi.
In C-F, the third relation from the front and end is o or oi.
Only the center relations differ in each sequence.
A compact representation for the different sequences of spatial relations is a motion tree (see figure 2(a)).
The root node has the label "p or pi".
We are at this node whenever the spatial relationship between two intervals is either p or pi (we do not care which).
Similarly for the other nodes.
When we are at a node, the only allowable spatial transitions are to adjacent nodes.
For example, when the spatial relation is "m or mi", the only valid transitions are to "p or pi" and "0 or oi".
The motion of two intervals must follow a path in the tree.
For example, the motion tree paths for sequences A-F are shown at the bottom of figure 1.
2.2 Two Dimensional Motion Randall, Cui, and Cohn [3, 41 identify 8 possible relationships between two planes in two dimensional space: I Relation Disconnected Partially Overlaps Tangential Proper Part Non Tangential Proper Part  I Svmbol I 1nverse 1  2.5 Time So far, we have ignored the temporal aspect.
A  uc I PO  TPP NTPP  spatial relation can remain true indefinitely if the objects involved are stationary.
But, we get interesting restrictions when the objects are in motion.
The relation DC must hold over a temporal interval.
The relation cannot be true at an isolated point in time.
But, the next relation in the motion tree (i.e., EC) can be true at an isolated point.
For example, the collision of two billiard balls (as in figure 5 ) .
EC can also be true over an interval (e.g., rolling a billiard ball on top of a box).
This pattern percolates throughout the motion tree.
The root and alternating nodes (i.e., DC, PO, and INS) must be true over a temporal interval.
The other nodes can be true either at an isolated point or over an interval (see figure 6).
1 TPP-l NTPP-l  Six of the relations are shown in figure 3.
There are also the inverses of TPP and NTPP denoted by TPP-l and NTPP-' respectively.
As in the one dimensional case, we construct a motion tree.
Assume we have two disconnected (DC) planes and at least one is moving towards the other.
If they collide, we have EC holding between them.
If they bounce or brush off each other, we then return to DC.
Otherwise, they go through each other and we have PO.
At this point, we have four possibilities for the next spatial relation: EC, =, TPP or T P P - l .
Which transition happens next depends on the relative motion and sizes of the objects.
The different choices are shown by the edges coming out of PO in the motion tree in figure 2(b).
If the next transition is TPP or TPP-' then we can either go up or down in the tree.
Once at a leaf (i.e., NTPP or N T P P - l , = ) the only choice is to go up.
3  Axiomatization  We provide a first order axiomatization of the generic motion tree and its properties.
Time: We use a totally ordered set of dense points Fluent 2 is true at time t is written as true(t,e).
If e is true over the interval ( t l , t z ) (assume tl < t z ) we write: true(tl,ta,z).
For example, if the relation between planes pl and p2  for time.
178  p or pi  D C:  DC  m or mi  EC  EC  o or oi  P0,  PO  I I  I I  / fi\ eq  /  s or si or f or  I  TPPorTPP-  l-\  I  I I  =  I  NTPP or NTPF'-l  d or di  / \-  INST INS  Figure 2: Motion trees  Figure 3: 2-D spatial r'elations over the temporal interval (0,lO) is EC we have: true(O,lO,rel(pl,pz,EC)).
The order of rel's first two arguments is not important:  Existence and Uniqueness: At any point in time, there exists a spatial relation between two objects: Vt, 2,y 3r .
true(t,rel(z,y, T ) )  [true(t1,tz, rel(p1,p z , r ) ) * true(tl,tz,rel(pzlpl,.
))I A [true(t1,rel(p1,pz,r)) * true(t1,rel(pz,p1,.))I.
Only a node from the motion tree can appear ~ t sthe third argument to rei.
Something is true over an interval if and only if it is true at each point in the interval: V z ,t l ,t z .
true(t1,t z , z) * [bt .
tl < t < t z --+ true(t,z)], Note that no commitments are made at the endpoints of the interval,  V t l ,tz,p1,pz, r  and the relation is unique:  vt, 8,Y , TI,r2 .
[true(t,rel(z,Y,T I ) ) A true(t,rel(z,y , r z ) ) ]-+ T I = r2.
Temporal restrictions: The root and alternating nodes:  int(DC)A int(P0)A int(1NS) must be true over an interval:  Motion tree: The edges are: edge(DC,E C ) A edge(EC,PO) A edge(P0,I N S T ) A edge(INST,I N S ) A edge(P0,=).
Edges are bi-directional:  V z ,y edge(y, I  Smooth motion: The transition of spatial relations must follow a path in the motion tree: Vz,Y,Tl,TZ,tl,t2,t3 .
true(tl,t2,rel(z,y,rl))A true(t2,t 3 , rel(z,Y,f 2 ) ) A  * edge(z,Y ) .
179  DC  EC  -  PO  PO  EC  DC  i DCA : I : :  TPP or TPP-'  EC:  ' '  .
.
..  - 1 NTPP or NTPP-l  Figure 4: 2-D Example  DC  EC  DC  :  DCA  :  EC  : I : :...I..
.
:  I NTPP or NTPP-I Figure 5: 3-D Example  r1 # r2 -+ edge(r1,' 2 ) v [3r3 .
true(t2,re/($,y, 7-3)) A edge(7-1 , ~ 3 A) edge(r3,r2)].
The ab ve states th t if relation r1 holds over (t1,tz) and r2 over (t2, t 3 ) then either r1 and r2 are neighbors in the motion tree, or there was another relation r3 true at t 2 which is a neighbor of both r1 and r2.
4  relations.
A perturbation diagram is equivalent to a path in our motion tree.
Because he is dealing with a set of paths, his axiomatization is not as succinct as ours.
He requires 49 axioms versus our 9.
Galton places temporal restrictions on the spat*ial relations by dividing them into what he defines as states of motion and position.
This division is artificial.
For example, let two objects be disjoint over the time interval (a,b), and touching over the interval (b,c).
Since touching (EC) is defined to be a state of position, the objects are forced to be touching at time point b according to Galton.
There is no reason to prefer one relation over another.
We should make no commitment at time b. Galton also defines a "perturbation principle'' which states that spatial relations alternate between states of motion and position.
A restatement of this principle is to say that a transition must be to a neigh-  Comparison with Previous Work  Galton [2] considers the motion of bodies passing over a fixed region in two dimensional space.
Note that Galton restricts his attention to two dimensional space.
But, he does consider the motion of points.
Galton's ontology is also based on the transition of spatial relations.
He constructs what are called pertubataon diagrams to restrict the transition between  180  Generic  DC EC PO  -  INST INS  1-0 P or Pl m or mi o or 01 eq s or si or f o r fi d or di  3- D  2-U  TPP or T P P  T P P or  TPP-  Table 1: Associated spatiatl relations  Figure 6: Temporal restrictions Special thanks to Trisha Chien for insightful discussions.
boring node in the motion tree.
We do not represent spatial points or the relative sizes of objects although it would be simple to implement).
Galton aes.
6  5  Refierences [l] J.F.
Allen, Towards a General Theory of Action and Time.
Artificial Intelligence 23 (2), 123-154, 1'984.
Conclusion  We presented an ontology suitable for representing and reasoning about the qualitative motion of ndimensional objects in n-dimensional space.
It is important for the dimensions of the objects and space to be equal.
Otherwise, the motion tree does not apply.
For example, assume we have two parallel equal lines in two dimensional space that are moving towards each other.
The transition goes from DC directly to =.
This is not a path in the motion tree.
The representation of motion is based on the transition of spatial relations.
The transitions form a tree which is isomorphic across dimensions.
The smooth motion of two objects must follow a path in the tree.
We further presented a very succinct axiomatization of the ontology leading to a first order logic for representing and reasoning about the qualitative motion of n-dimensional objects in n-dimensional space.
Our choice of using a first order logic is arbitrary, one could easily use any procedural or declarative language to capture the ontology.
Note that all our examples involved two objects.
We represent worlds with more than two objects by considering pair wise relations.
[2] A.. Galton, Towards an integrated logic of space, tiime, and motion.
In 13th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, p. 1550-1555, Clhambery, France, 1993.
[3] D.A.
Randall, Z. Cui, and A.G. Cohn, A n interval logic f o r space based on "connection".
In Tenth Eluropean Conference on Artificial Intelligence, p. 394-398, Vienna, Austria, 1992.
[4] L).A.
Randall, Z. Cui, and A.G. Cohn, A spatial logic based on regions and connection.
In Third International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Blepresentation and Reasoning, p. 165-176, Cambridge, Mass.,USA, 1992.
Acknowledgments Research of the second author is supported by IntelAgent R.& D. Inc, and NSERC research grant 46773.
181