Contextual Logic of Change and Contextual Proofs Pedro A. Matos and Jo80 P. Martins Instituto Superior Tdcnico Technical University of Lisbon  Abstract  respond to the intended solutions.
Several approacheshave been proposed to expand and correct the simple abnormality theories approach, including [7, 10, 1, 13,6], to name a few.
However, the specificity of these approaches still raises some problems.
Lifschitz, for example, mentions the difficultiesin dealing with the multitude of choices that these methods allow, claiming that those are "the main reason why circumscriptionis not applied today in knowledge representation as widely as would be expected" [13].
He proposes the use of nested abnormality theories instead, which introduces blocks and the embedding of blocks, about which he writes "...each block can be viewed as a group of axioms that describes a certain collection of predicates and functions, and the embedding of blocks reflects the dependence of these descriptions on each other" [13].
This dependencerelation among propositions goes against our understanding of McCarthy's ideas, namely that "the general facts of common sense are described by a collection of sentences that are not oriented in advance to particular problems" [17, Section 111, which we subscribe.
Another approach to the problem of formalizing change is what Sandewall and Shoham [21] named the meta-level approach.
In this approach,propositions do not include the identificationof situationsand change is modeled as changing the set of propositions that holds in situations.
Ginsberg and Smith's Possible Worlds Approach [41 is based in these ideas.
However, this approach has been criticized by Winslett [24], who proposes the Possible Models Approach, according to which the models, rather than the formulas, are to be changed.
We argue, in a forthcoming paper, that change may be modeled using syntactic approaches.
One example of the meta-level approach is Mutation Logic (ML) [19,20], which is a logic where execution of change is modeled as changing the set of propositions that hold before change is executed into a new set.
Change is represented by a proposition describing its pw-conditions and post-conditions.
However, this logic has limitations affecting its expressive power, in particular, there is no way to express side-effects of change and the language of the logic does not allow the representation of plans.
The approach we are developing, Contextual Logic of  In this paper we discuss CLOC, an alternative approach to reasoning about action and change, which is neither based in the Situation Calculus nor in Circumscription.In our approach, inspired by the Possible Worlds Approach, change is modeled as changing the theory that models the world.
We extended First Order Logic, in order to be able to represent elementary and structured changes,and define predicates relating propositions that hold in different situations.
We present one rule of inference of this new logic, E X p p , that is used for concluding what propositions hold afer the execution of change.
Furthermore, we argue that traditional proof systems, e.g.
Fitch's and Lemmon'sproof systems, are not suitable for this logic, and propose a proof system where we can distinguishbetweenpropositions that hold before and after change has taken place.
1.
Introduction Situation Calculus [15] is a formalism for reasoning about action and change.
In this formalism, propositions refer situations, thus creating the need to reformulate the propositions after changing the situation.
This problem is strongly related to the frame problem, the problem of deciding which propositionshold after change has occurred.
One of the approaches used to try to solve the frame problem is Circumscription [16, 17,121, a method for performing common-sensereasoning.
The circumscriptionof predicate relative to a theory minimizes the extent of that predicate.
McCarthy [17] proposes the use of simple a b normality theories, whose general facts are described using the predicate Ab, for abnormal.
The circumscription of predicate Ab, relative to the theory, with all predicates variable, would presumably be enough to model commonsense reasoning and solve the frame problem.
However, as McCarthy realized, this was not the case.
Hanks and McDermott [5] presented an example, the Yale ShootingProblem, which showsthat the solutionspresented by the use of the circumscriptionmethod do not cor-  0-8186-7937-9/97 $10.00 0 1997 IEEE  153  Change (CLOC), is an extension of First Order Logic POL), augmenting the expressiveness of LM and using some ideas from the Possible World Approach.
In this approach, situations are modeled as belief spaces of contexts (a context is a set of hypotheses and a belief space of a context is the set of derivable propositions from the context) and are not represented explicitly by any object in the language.
A consequence of this representation is the limitation of expressiveness of the language, since we are no longer able to represent propositions about situations.
Another consequence, more important if we want to reason about change, is that propositions are relative to the situation being described and not to other situations.
This may raise some problems when modeling reasoning about change, because this involvesreasoning about propositions that hold in different situations.
Change, in this approach, is modeled as the change of the set of propositions that describe a situation to another set of propositions (in the framework of predicate calculus, we may think of changing the value of some predicates as we change the situation being represented).
When using this representation of situations, however, change can't be represented using FOL without expanding it's expressive power, since change involves propositions that hold in different situations.
We expanded FOL i) by introducing new terms that represent change; ii) by defining new functions on these terms that are used to represent structured changes; iii) by introducing new predicates relating propositions in Werent situations, for example Xp ,which is applied to a term representing change, and means that it has been executed; and iv) adding inference rules to allow the derivation of the effects of change.
The application of these rules of inference, that mention proposition in different situations, raises some problems if traditional proof styles, discussed in Section 2, are used.
The problem is that traditional proof styles are appropriate for reasoning within the same situation, but are not for reasoning when change occurs and situations are not reifyed.
When dealing with change, even if a proof was made for a proposition in the situation before change was executed, the proposition might not hold in the context that results from change and, therefore, should not be used in any further derivation.
Contextual proofs are different from traditional proofs because they enable to crosslines out (we call this strokes), to distinguish between proof lines that may and may not be used for deriving new propositions after a change was executed.
We present, in Section 2, two classical proof styles, argue that they are not appropriate to represent proofs for CLOC, and then propose the contextual proof, a generalization of Lemon's proof system [9].
In Section 3, we present one of CLOC's inference rule that allows the  {a + b}  { a + b, b + c }  3  {a  -+ b b b +c a  c u+c ( b + c) + ( a + c)  1,Reit 3,4,MP 2,Reit 5,6, M P 3 - 7, + I 2 - 8, + I  -+ b , b + c , a }  { a + b, b  + c,a}  b,b-+ c,c} {U + b,b + c,a} { a -+ b, b + c, a } { U + b, b + c } { a + b} {U+  Figure 1: Example of Fitch's proof.
derivation of the consequencesof change, and, in Section 4, we give two examples of this new inference rule using the new proof style.
2.
Proof systems  In this section we discuss two traditional proof styles, Fitch's proof and Lemmon's proof, and argue that they are not appropriate for dealing with change, when situations are not reifyed.
A new proof system is then proposed.
2.1.
Fitch's proof According to Fitch ([3], SS5.5.
), a proof is a sequence of items satisQingat least one of the followingconditions: (1) it is an axiom of the system; (2) it is a direct consequence of preceding items of the sequence; (3) it is a hypothesis of the sequence; or (4) it is a subordinate proof.
A proof is said to be subordinate to another if it is an item of the other proof.
In a subordinateproof, we can reiterate items from the subordinatingproof into a subordinate proof, but we cannot reiterate the other way round, from the subordinate to it's subordinatingproof.
In Figure 1, we present a proof that illustrates Fitch's proof representation.
Each line has: a unique line number; a wff, the indicationof the rule of inference used in this line (we changed the names of the inference rules for the sake of uniformhation); and the context, the set of hypotheses that were raised and were not dropped in the proof up to this line (this is different from Fitch'spresentation, since he doesn't present the context in his proofs).
In this proof, we introduce hypothesis a -+ b (Line l), use a subordinate proof to derive a 4 c based on b ci (Lines 2-8).
and use Implication Introduction to deduce (b + c) + (U + c) (Line 9).
The subordinate proof in Lines 2-8 uses another subordinateproof (Limes3-7).
The main point in this example is to illustrate the change of the contexts when entering and leaving subor-  154  (1)  1  (2) (31 (13) (1,2,3)  2  {1,2}  (1)  a+b b+c  3 4 5  a  6 7  a+  b c c  ( b + c ) -+ ( a +  c)  2.3.
Discussion  HYP HYP HYP 3,1, MP 4,2,MP 3,5,+ I 2,6,+ I  When using traditional proofs styles, there is no way to express that some propositions should no longer be derivable after performing change.
ConsiderFitch's proof style.
Given a proof, we can augment it raising the hypothesis of executing a given change and conclude its consequences (the representation of this proposition and the rule of inference that describes this derivation are discussed in Section 3).
One possible consequenceis to remove a set of propositions from the belief space, but, unfortunately, there is no general way to represent it.
Even though subordinate proofs allow hypotheses to be raised and dropped, it is not general enough, because it imposes an order according to which hypotheses are dropped (we cannot drop the hypotheses in subordinating proofs without dropping the hypotheses in its subordinate proofs).
Lemmon's proof isn't better, because there is no way to differentiate propositions in different situations, using the information availablein the proof.
There is no way to conclude that a true proposition in a situation is no longer true after change has occurred, like our next example shows.
Suppose, for example, that the proposition that w is a green wall is represented as hypothesis Green(w) and that there is a proposition to represent that w was painted white (we will discuss the representation of this proposition in Section 3).
From these two propositions, we want to derive, using appropriateinference rules, that the wall is white, White(w).However, using hmmon's proof style, the conjunction Green(w) A White(w) can be derived, meaning that the wall is both green and white, a proposition that makes no sense, because there is no way to say that the hypothesesthat underlies Green(w)don't hold any longer.
The problem is that lines, in Lemmon's proof, are never reduced and the wff of a line may always be used by an inference rule.
A proof is "monotonic"in the sense that the set of conclusionsalways grows as the proof is augmented.
We now propose the contextual proof, which distinguishesderivationsbased on hypothesesin a given description of a situations from the other derivations.
Figure 2: Example of Lemmon's proof.
dinate proofs: in Line 2, the context is augmented with the hypothesis raised in the subordinateproof and becomes {U + b, b + c}; in Line 3, the context is changed to {U + b, b -+ c, U}.
When leaving the subordinate proof, the context is reduced and the hypothesis raised in the subordinate proof can no longer be used.
In Line 8, the hypothesis a raised in the subordinate proof in Lines 3-7 is dropped, and the context is now {U + b, b + c}.
In Line 9, the same happens to the hypothesis raised in subordinate proof in Lines 2-8 and the context is, therefore, {a + b}.
2.2.
Lemon's proof  Lemmon's definition of a proof is slightly different from Fitch's definition: he doesn't include neither subordinate proofs nor axioms.
According to Lemmon [9], a proof is a sequence of  lines, where each line may represent: (1) a hypothesis; or (2) a conclusion drawn from the application of inference rules.
In Figure 2, we show the proof correspondingto the example of last section,but now using Lemon's proof representation.
In each line, we represent: the set of hypotheses that supports the WEin the line (notice that it is not the and an context of the proof); a unique line number; a e, indication of the rule of inference used to generate the line.
In this proof, and beyond the line content differences between Fitch's and Lemmon's proofs, such as supports (omitted in Fitch's proof) and contexts (omitted in Lemmon's proof), the main difference is that Lemmon does not use subordinateproofs.
Therefore,it makes no sense to reiterate proof lines and, thus, there are no lines corresponding to Lines 4 and 6 of the previous example.
2.4.
Contextual proof  The reason why we have developed the new proof system is that using Lemmon's proof system with CLOC would led to confusions, namely because there is no way to distinguish between propo&hns that hold in different situations.
The idea of contextualproof is to generalize Lemmon's proof, allowing strokes to be made in some lines, meaning that the wEURf in that line should not be used in any future derivation, at least until all line strokes are removed.
We  When using Lemon's proof style, the structuringcapabilities introduced by subordinate proofs in Fitch's proofs are lost, since this subordination scheme is not used by Lemon, and it makes no sense to describe the evolution of context in Lemon's proofs.
155  Figure 3: Deduction of U  further derivations.
Even though we don't present the context analysis like the one when presenting Fitch's proof example, it is interesting to notice that the context evolution would be the same as Fitch's proof example evolution, if we ignore the lines in Fitch's proof example where the reiteration inference rule was used.
+ C.  3.
Contextual logic of change  Figure 4: Deduction of ( b -+ C) -+( a -+  In t h i s section, we discuss the contextual logic of change, the logic we propose to handle change, and present one of its rules of inference.
CLOC expands First Order Logic by: i) introducing terms that represent change, the mutations; ii) introducing operations for building structured changes (also called plans); iii) introducingnew predicates relating propositions in different situations; and iv) defining inference rules that handle change.
A mutation corresponds to an atomic change.
A mutation p; is described by two sets of propositions, the pre-conditions, @ ( p i ) ,and post-conditions, @ ( p i ) ,and is written as p(Q(pi);@ ( p i ) ) .The set Q ( p i ) - @ ( p i )contains propositions that are no longer known to be true after the execution of change.
For example, painting white a green wall w may be represented by the mutation p({Green(w)};{White(w)}).
We define changes as generalizations of mutations.
There are two kinds of changes: elementary that corresponds to mutations, and structured changes, that corresponds to the compositionof mutations and plans.
We consider two types of structured changes: (1) sequential execution plans and (2) unordered execution plans.
Given - I I 2 represent the sequenchanges 111and I I 2 , then 1111 tial execution of II1 and I I 2 and 4 III,I I 2 represent the unordered execution of II1 and I I 2 .
Since mutations are terms in CLOC, propositions about change may now be written, using, for example, the predicate X p , which means that the term it applies to has been executed in the past.
When considering only one change, the proposition "the mutation p has been executed"is written as X p ( p ) .
We now present a sketch of one rule of inference of CLOC, Elimination of Execution of a Mutation in the Past, E X p p , that governs changes in contexts due to the execution of an elementary change.
We will be interested,in the rest of this paper, in the theories that Lifschitz [l 11 called "theories of a single action",in which only one elementary changeis considered.
The rule that handles the execution of a plan, instead of a mutation, will be discussed elsewhere.
In order to present the rule E X p p , we define the support of a derivation as the set of hypotheses that are used in the derivation.
c),  also allow axioms to be present in a proof, as in Fitch's proof.
We base our proof definition in Lemon's proof definition.
A proof is a sequence of lines, where each line represents: (1) a hypothesis; (2) a conclusion drawn from the application of inference rules; or (3) an axiom.
Each line may or may not be struck out.
Based on the representation of Lemon's proofs, we add to the representation of a line a fifth item, containing a sequence of pairs, where the fist item of each pair is the just@cation of the stroke and corresponds the number of the line that caused the stroke, and the second item of the pair, if it exists, is the just@cation of stroke erasing, represented between brackets, and correspondsto the line that caused the removal of the stroke (stroke erasing will not be illustrated in this paper).
As an example of contextual proof, we present an example using an extensionof Lemmon's rule of Implication Introduction.
According to this rule, lines correspondingto the subordinate proof are struck through and cannot to be further used, at least until the strokes are removed.
As a matter of fact, using contextual proof, presumes changing all inference rules so that they consider only the lines that are not struck through, instead of consideringall lines.
In Figure 3, we derive the implication a -+ c based on hypotheses a + b and b + c. Lines 3-5 are struck through and the justification of the strokes is Line 6.
We use indentation to emphasize the structure of the proof.
This proof is continued, in Figure 4, with the derivation of (b -+ c) --+ (a + c) in Line 7, based in a + b, and Lines 2-6 are struck through by t h i s line (the lines that were struck and are being struck again are represented with double strokes).
Again, none of these lines may be used in any  +  156  (1)  1 V(r)(Saucer(r)H Cup(.))
Hyp 2 Saucer(r1) HYP (1) 3 Saucer(r1) ++ Cup(r1) 1,VE 2,3,ii E U,2) 4 %J(Tl) (5) 5 X p ( p ( ( S a u c e r ( r l ) ) ; {Saucer(rz)))) HYP (2)  Figure 5: Proof in the painting example before the application of E X p p .
Figure 7: Proof in the saucerlcup example before the application of E X p p .
Figure 6: Proof in the painting example after the application of E X p p .
Consider a context, that represents the initial situation, and a mutation p, that represents a change from the initial situation into another situation.
If there are no hypotheses referring the predicate X p in the context, we may introduce hypothesis X p ( p ),and if from the hypotheses in the context there is a derivation of the conjunction of pre-conditions of p, A ( Q ( p ) ) ,then the execution of rule E X p p has the following effects: i) it removes a set of hypotheses from the context such that both the preconditions in Q ( p ) that are not post-conditions in @ ( p ) , and negations of the post-conditions, are no longer derivable, and the set of removed hypotheses is " a 1 relative to set inclusion; and ii) it adds the conjunction of the post-conditions, A(@@)),to the belief space,with support { X P ( P ) )U S ~ P ( A ( Q ( P ) where ) ) , S ~ P ( A ( * ( P ) )is) the support of the derivation of A( Q ( p ) )(for clarity, in step i, we are ignoring propositions such as "the mutation p will be executed", which should also be removed from the belief space after executingchange p).
The contextual proofs are appropriate for being used with this logic since some rules of inference in this logic presume the change of contexts, with removing and adding hypotheses to the original context.
4.
Figure 8: Proof in the saucerkup example before the application of E X p p .
In Figure 6, we continue this proof eliminating the execution of change p({Green(w));{White(w)}), and we change the proof's context by removing the precondition of the mutations, Green(w),since it does not belong to the set of the post-conditions, justifying the strokes with Line 3, and deriving White(w) with support {Green(w),XP(P( green(^)); {White(w)))) ), that is, the wall w is white because in the initial situation it was green and it has been painted white.
4.2.
The saucer and cup example  Examples  In this section,we present two examples of CLOC using contextualproof.
In the first example, we formalize the example presented earlier of painting walls, and in the second example we discuss the ramificationproblem.
4.1.
The wall painting example We now present an example of a deduction in CLOC, using contextual proof.
We now present the solution of the problem raised in Section 2.3, using CLOC.
In Figure 5, we raise hypotheses Green(w) and Xp(p({Green(w)};{ W h i t e ( w ) } ) ) .
157  In this example, similar to examples presented in 118, 13, we consider two objects, a saucer and a cup, and the cup is on the saucer.
In the initial situation, both objects are in room T I .
Changing the saucer to room ~2 results in changing the position of both the saucer and the cup.
In Figure 7, we present the proof before rule E X p p was applied, and in Figure 8 we present the proof after the rule was applied.
It is interesting to notice that the results from this approach depends strongly on the set of hypotheses that was chosen to model initial situation.
According to CLOC, there is only one description of the world resulting from the execution of change.
If we considered the hypotheses Cup(rl) instead of Saucer(rl), the set of hypotheses raised would describe the same belief space, but there would be two possible situations resulting from the execution of change, corresponding to moving both the saucer and the cup, or only moving the cup.
This happens because, if we considered hypothesis Cup(r1) instead of  derivation of the consequences of the execution of actions.
We presented two examples of derivations using this rule.
CLOC is a result of project we are developing to extend the SNePS system [23, 221.
In this project, we are going to integrate three descendants of logic S W M [14], the logic underlying the SNePS, which are: the Mutation Logic [19, 201, a logic for dealing with change, as described above; the logic SWMC [2], a logic for default reasoning underlying SNePSwD, a version of the SNePS system using defaults; and the OK BDI formalism of [8], the formalism underlying the SNePS actuator.
The logic CLOC results from the integration of Mutation Logic with OK BDI formalism.
The resulting system will be used to perform reasoning about action and change using incomplete information.
Other papers relative to this approach will be available inhttp://www.gia.ist.utl.pt/'-Pedro.
S a u c e r ( q ) ,then the change would have not been completely specified.
It is quite common to have different contexts resulting from the execution of change.
This happens when change is not completely specified for the given set of hypotheses and different choices of hypotheses to be removed from a context must be considered.
Baker [l] discusses a similar scenario and concludes that his approach doesn't solve the ramification problem because both situations are acceptable by his method and he claims that the two alternatives should be considered.
However, CLOC only considers one of the alternatives,because the initial situation is modeled as the belief space generated from a set of propositions that were considered relevant, and those propositions should also be mentioned in the definition of change if they are to be removed from the belief space.
Our example shows that the ramificationproblem, when understood as deriving the representation of world resulting from applying a certain change to a situation, cannot be solved when there are alternative derivations of the propositions that are to be removed from the belief space.
Acknowledgements We thank all the members of GIA for their comments and support and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive criticism.
This work was partially supported by Junta Nacional de Investigagilo Cientifica e Tecnol6gica and by PRAXIS XXI under grant 2/2.l/TIT/1568/95.
5.
Concluding remarks We present an alternative approachto Situation Calculus [15] andCircumscription [16,17,12] formodelingchange, the CLOC approach,which is a logic based on the Possible Worlds Approach [4].
We argue that the lack of expressiveness resulting from not reifying situations may result in a solution to the frame problem (as presented by McCarthy and Hayes, in [15]).
Therefore, the resulting logic is expected to model appropriately reasoning about action and change.
In this paper, we presented part of the proof theory of this logic.
The semantictheory has not yet been developed, and, therefore, the semanticsis still informal.
According to the proof theory, execution is modeled by the change of contexts.
After executing change, some propositions should no longer be derived.
We discuss Fitch's and Lemon's proof systems 13, 91, and argued that they are not adequate to be used when representing some proofs in CLOC.
We proposed, as an alternative, the contextual proof system, in which lines in a proof may by struck out, allowing the distinction between propositions that hold before and after the execution of change.
CLOC is based in the Possible Worlds Approach, according to which situations are represented by sets of propositions.
We defined an extensionof First Order Logic, introducing new terms representing change, operations to build structured representationsof change, and new predicates relating propositionsthat hold in different situations.
We presented E X p p , one inference rule that describes the  References [l] Andrew Baker.
Nonmonotonic reasoning in the framework if situation calculus.
Artgcial Intelligence, 495-23, 1991.
[2] Maria dos Remidios Cravo and JoZLo P. Martins.
SNePSwD: A Newcomer to the SNePS Family.
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence (JET&), 5(2&3):135- 148,1993.
Frederic Brenton Fitch.
Symbolic Logic - An Introduction.
The Ronald Press Company, New York, 1952.
Mathew L. Ginsberg and David E. Smith.
Reasoning about Action I: A Possible Worlds Approach.
ArtiJicial Intelligence, 35165-195, 1988.
Steve Hanks and Drew McDermott.
Nonmonotonic Logic and Temporal Projection.
Art@cial Intelligence, 33:379412,1987.
G. Neelakantan Kartha and Vladimir Lifschitz.
Actions  with Indirect Effects (Preliminary Report).
In International Conference on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, pages 341-350,1994.
Henry Kautz.
The logic of persistence.
In Proceedings of the Fifh National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 401-405,1986, Deepak Kumar and Stuart C. Shapiro.
Acting in Service of Inference (and vice-versa).
In Douglas Dankel 11, editor,  158  [23] S. C. Shapiro and W. I. Rapaport.
SNePS Considered as a Fully Intensional Propositional Semantic Network.
In N. Cercone and G. McCalla, editors, The Knowledge Frontier, pages 263-315.
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987.
Proceedings of the Seventh Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Symposium (FLAIRS-94),May 1994.
[9] E. I. Lemmon.
Beginning Logic.
Van Nostrand Reinhold (International),1965.
[24] Marianne Winslett.
Reasoning about action using a possible models approach.
In Proceedings of the Seventh National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,pages 89-93, 1988.
[101 Vladimir Lifschitz.
Formal theories of action.
In F.Brown,  editor, The Frame Problem in Artificial Intelligence: Proceedings of the I987 Workshop,pages 35-58.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1987.
[ 111 Vladimir Lifschitz.
Frames in the Space of Situations.
Ar-  tificial Intelligence,46:365-376, 1990.
[121 Vladimir Lifschitz.
Circunscription.
In Dov Gabbay, C. J.  Hogger, and I.
A. Robinson, editors, Handbok ofArt@cial Intelligence and Logic Programming,volume 3, pages 287352.
Oxford University Press, 1993.
[131 Vladimir Lifschitz.
Nested abnormality theories.
Artificial  Intelligence,74, 1995.
[141 JoPo P. Martins and Stuart C. Shapiro.
A Model for Belief  Revision.
ArtificialIntelligence,35:25-79, 1988.
[151 John McCarthy and P. Hayes.
Some philosophical problems  from the standpoint of artificial intelligence.
In Machine Intelligence,volume 4, pages 463-502.
EdinburgUniversity Press, 1969.
Circumscription - A Form of Non[16] John McCarthy.
Monotonic Reasoning.
Artificial Intelligence, 13:27-39, 1980.
[171 John McCarthy.
Application of Circumscription to Formal-  izing Common-Sense Knowledge.
Artificial Intelligence, 28:89-116, 1986.
[18] Karen L. Myers and David E. Smith.
The Persistence of Derived Information.
In Proceedings of the Seventh National Conferenceon Artgcial Intelligence, pages 496-500, 1988.
[191 Carlos Pinto-FerreiraandJoPo P.Martins.
A Formal System  for Reasoning about Change.
In Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Artijcial Intelligence, pages 503508, London.
1990.
Pitman Publishing.
[20] Carlos Pinto-Fmeira and JoPo P. Martins.
The strict assumption - a propositional approach to change.
Journal of Experimental Theoretical Artgcial Intelligence, 5(2&3):215-224,1993.
[21] EFik Sandewall and Yoav Shoham.
Non-monotonic Temporal Reasoning.
In Dov Gabbay, C. J. Hogger, and J.
A. Robinson, editors, Handbok of Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming,volume 4, pages 439-498.
Oxford University Press, 1994.
The SNePS family.
Computers & Mathematicswith Applications, 23(25):243-275, JanUw-MarCh 1992.
[22] Stuart C. Shapiro and William J. Rapaport.
159