Undecidability and temporal logic: some landmarks from Turing to the present Valentin Goranko Technical University of Denmark  TIMEa2012 Leicester, September 12-14, 2012  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Outline aV Introduction: a brief retrospective.
aV Turingas undecidability of the Halting Problem (HP) from  temporal logics perspective.
aV Undecidability of interval temporal logics by reduction from  the HP aV Undecidability by reduction from tiling problems aV Undecidability of temporalized logics aV Undecidability of quantitative temporal logics aV Outlook and concluding remarks TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  The focus of this talk  aV Undecidability of the satisfiability/validity problem;  (almost) no model checking; aV Only propositional temporal (and modal) logics;  (almost) no first-order logics; aV Details of some interesting cases and an overview of the rest.
No claim of completeness!
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Introduction: a brief retrospective aV 1936: Turing proves the undecidability of the Halting problem.
aV 1936: Church proves the undecidability of first-order logic.
aV 1957-1967: Prior introduces formal temporal logic.
aV 1962: BuEchi: decidability of the MSO of one successors  1969: Rabin: decidability of the MSO of two successors aV 1974: Burstall proposes the use of temporal logics in CS.
1977: Pnueli introduces LTL and proposes the use of temporal logics to specification and verification of reactive systems.
aV Since early 1970s: many decidability results for propositional  modal and temporal logics, using FMP or BuEchi/Rabin results.
Modal/temporal logics praised for their arobust decidabilitya.
aV However, since the mid 1970s a variety of undecidability  results in propositional temporal logics emerges, too.
aV In retrospective: Turingas undecidability of the Halting TIMEa2012  problem is the first such undecidability result.
Valentin Goranko  Turingas undecidability of the Halting problem from temporal logic perspective  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  The halting of a Turing machine as a temporal logic formula aV The configuration graph of a TM as a transition system  Conf (M): aV States: configurations of the TM aV Transitions: determined by the TM transition relation aV Labels for initial and terminal states  aV Temporal logic for Turing machines: aV Atomic propositions init for the initial states and term for  terminal states, plus temporal operators incl.
X and F .
aV Expressing the halting property (for deterministic TM) :  init a F term TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  The Halting problem as a model checking problem The Halting problem as a local model checking problem: aV The halting of a Turing machine M on any given input is  equivalent to the truth of F term at the corresponding initial state in Conf (M).
aV Thus, the undecidability of the Halting problem translates into  an undecidable local model checking problem in the class of transition systems of type Conf (M).
aV Applying this to the universal Turing machine U yields an  undecidable local model checking problem on Conf (U) alone.
The Halting problem as a global model checking problem: aV The halting of M on every given input is equivalent to the  validity of init a F term in Conf (M).
aV The undecidability of the Halting problem implies that the TIMEa2012  problem whether a given TM always halts is undecidable.
Valentin Goranko  The Halting problem as a validity problem  aV Any Turing machine M can be described by a temporal logic  formula IS(M) in a sufficiently expressive temporal language.
aV The Halting problem for M on a blank tape is equivalent to  the validity of (IS(M) aSS init-blank) a F term  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Early undecidability results in propositional temporal logics The first known to me undecidability result for a propositional temporal logic: Steve Thomason Reduction of Second-Order Logic to Modal Logic Mathematical Logic Quarterly, vol 21, 1975, pp.
107-114  Reduction of the frame validity based logical consequence the MSO theory of a binary relation to a propositional tense logic T15 with a set of Prioras tense operators Hi , Gi , Pi , Fi over each of 15 temporal orderings 1 , .
.
.
, 15 , satisfying special interrelations.
Further, the logical consequence in T15 is reduced to logical consequence in plain modal logic.
NB: the reduction adds a special formula I' to the premises, so it does not reduce validity to validity.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Early undecidability results in propositional temporal logics contad Stephen Isard A Finitely Axiomatizable Undecidable Extension of K. Theoria 43 (3), 1977, pp.
195-202.
This is seemingly the first undecidability result in modal logic, using reduction from the Halting problem (of Minsky machines).
Valentin Shehtman Undecidable Propositional Calculi.
Problems of Cybernetics.
Non-classical logics and their applications, vol.
75, 1982, p.74-116 (in Russian)  These results refer to specially constructed, mostly artificial, logics.
The first undecidability results on anaturala, purely temporal logics?
TIMEa2012  The answer seems to lead to interval logics.
Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of interval temporal logics  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Moszkowskias Propositional Interval Temporal Logic (PITL) Joseph Halpern, Zohar Manna, and Ben Moszkowski A Hardware Semantics Based on Temporal Intervals.
Tech Report STAN-CS-83-963, Stanford University, 1983.
Ben Moszkowski Reasoning about Digital Circuits.
PhD Thesis, Stanford University, 1983.
PITL-formulae: D ::= p | AZD | D aSS D |  D | D; D. Models of PITL: based on (finite) discrete linear orderings.
Formulae are evaluated on discrete intervals: finite sequences of states D = s0 , s1 , .
.
.
, sn , with n aL 0.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  PITL with locality: semantics and decidability aV Atomic propositions evaluated at states.
aV Locality principle: the value of an atomic proposition over an  interval is its value at the initial state of that interval.
aV Semantics of anexta operator   s0 , s1 , .
.
.
, sn |= D, where n > 0, iff s1 , .
.
.
, sn |= D aV Semantics of achopa operator ;  s0 , s1 , .
.
.
, sn |= D; D iff there is i where 0 a$?
i a$?
n, such that s0 , s1 , .
.
.
, si |= D and si+1 , .
.
.
, sn |= D. Theorem[Halpern and Moszkowski, 1983]: The satisfiability problem for PITL with locality is decidable, though [Kozena92] with nonelementary complexity.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  PITL: undecidability Theorem[Halpern and Moszkowski, 1983]: The satisfiability problem for PITL without locality is undecidable.
Proof idea: follows early 1980as work by Chandra, Halpern, Meyer and Parikh on process logics.
Uses undecidability of emptiness of the intersection of the languages of two context-free grammars (in Greibach normal form).
Given two context-free grammars G 1 and G 2, one can construct a PITL formula that is satisfiable iff the intersection of the languages generated by G 1 and G 2 is nonempty.
Proof details in:  TIMEa2012  Ben Moszkowski A Hierarchical Completeness Proof for Propositional Interval Temporal Logic with Finite Time.
Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics, Special issue on Interval Temporal Logics and Duration Calculi, vol.
14(12), 2004, pp 55a104 Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of duration calculi Duration calculus: extension of the PITL framework with the notion of a state and state duration.
Zhou Chaochen, C. A. R. Hoare and A.R.
Ravn A Calculus of Durations Information Processing Letters, 40(5):269-276, 1991  Even very simple fragments of DC are undecidable: Michael R. Hansen and Zhou Chaochen Duration Calculus: Logical Foundations Formal Aspects of Computing, vol.
9 (1997), pp.283 330  Proof technique: reduction from the halting problem for 2-counter Minsky machines.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Allenas interval relations J. F. Allen Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals.
Communications of the ACM, volume 26(11), pages 832-843, 1983.
TIMEa2012  later  hLi hLi  after/meets  hAi hAi  overlaps  hOi hOi  ends/finishes  hEi hEi  during  hDi hDi  begins/starts  hBi hBi  Valentin Goranko  Halpern-Shohamas interval logic J. Halpern and Y. Shoham A propositional modal logic of time intervals.
Proc.
of LICSa1986, pp.
279-292.
J. Halpern and Y. Shoham A propositional modal logic of time intervals.
Journal of the ACM, vol.
38(4), 1991, pp 935-962.
HS: a multimodal logic with modal operators associated with Allenas interval relations.
In the case of non-strict semantics when point intervals are allowed, it suffices to choose as primitive the modalities hBi, hE i, hBi, hE i corresponding to the relations begins, ends, and their inverses: D ::= p | AZD | D aSS D | hBiD | hE iD | hBiD | hE iD.
TIMEa2012  In the case of strict semantics without point intervals, the right and left neighbourhood modalities hAi and hAi must be added.
Valentin Goranko  Undecidability in interval logics: the bad news Hereafter we assume the non-strict semantics, but all results apply to the strict semantics, too.
Theorem[Halpern and Shohama91] The validity in HS over any class of ordered structures containing at least one with an infinitely ascending sequence is r.e.-hard.
Thus, in particular, HS is undecidable over the classes of all (non-strict) models, all linear models, all discrete linear models, all dense linear models, N, Z, Q, R, etc.
Proof idea: reduction from the non-halting problem for Turing machines to testing satisfiability in HS.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability in interval logics: can be worse...  Theorem[Halpern and Shoham] The validity in HS over any class of Dedekind complete ordered structures containing at least one with an infinitely ascending sequence is I 11 -hard.
In particular, the validity in HS over any of the orderings of the natural numbers, integers, or reals is not recursively axiomatizable.
Proof: by reduction to satisfiability in HS of the recurrence problem for non-deterministic TM, asking for existence of a computation of a given NTM entering the start state infinitely often.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  ... and even worse  Undecidability occurs even without existence of infinitely ascending sequences.
A class of ordered structures has unboundedly ascending sequences if for every n there is a structure in the class with an ascending sequence of length at least n. Theorem[Halpern and Shoham] The validity problem in HS interpreted over any class of Dedekind complete ordered structures having unboundedly ascending sequences is co-r.e.
hard.
In particular, satisfiability of HS formulae in the finite is r.e.
hard.
Proof idea: reduction from the halting problem for Turing machines to testing satisfiability in HS.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Some details of Halpern-Shohamas reduction setting the stage Fix a Turing machine M = h{0, 1}, Q, q0 , qf , I'i.
Atomic propositions: L = {0, 1, a, #, (q, 0), (q, 1), (q, B) : q a Q}, Truth in all future intervals: [F ]D := [A]D aSS [L]D. A special propositional constant D, true at all point intervals.
Truth at the beginning/end of the current interval: [[BP]]D := [B](D a D); [[EP]]D := [E ](D a D).
Every cell on the tape represented by an interval satisfying cell(p) := [[BP]]# aSS [[EP]]# aSS [D]p aSS hDip.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Some details of Halpern-Shohamas reduction IDs and configurations  ID: a sequence of cells, represented by an interval satisfying _ ID := hBicell(a)aSShE icell(a)aSShDi cell(l)aSSAZhDicell(a) laL,l6=#  Starting configurations: startID := IDaSShDi(cell((q0 , 0))a"cell((q0 , 1))a"cell((q0 , b))).
Final configuration: finalID := IDaSShDi(cell((qf , 0))a"cell((qf , 1))a"cell((qf , b))).
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Some details of Halpern-Shohamas reduction encoding computations Computations of M are encoded as sequences of configurations: aID1 a aID2 a aID3 a a .
.
.
To ensure matching the transition relation I', a special atomic proposition corr is used, saying that an interval start and ends with cells that are corresponding in two consecutive IDs.
Describing corr is the most ingenious part of the reduction.
In the long run, the formula computation is defined, which is true of an interval iff it encodes a legitimate computation of M. Now, non-halting is expressed by NoHalt := computation aSS [F ]AZ finalID.
Hence, the reduction from non-halting of M to SAT(NoHalt).
TIMEa2012  For the satisfiability of NoHalt, any interval structure with an infinite ascending chain suffices.
Valentin Goranko  Reduction from the halting problem Note, that halting cannot be expressed by computation aSS F finalID.
because there may be non-standard models, e.g.
on dense orders.
Such non-standard models can be eliminated on Dedekind complete orders by using the formula NoTelescope := AZhBi[E ]hDicell.
Eventually, the halting problem for M is reduced to satisfiability of Halt := computation aSS standard aSS hBistartID aSS hE ifinalID, where standard is a formula ensuring that any interval starting and ending with IDs can be subdivided into a finite number of IDs.
TIMEa2012  On Dedekind complete structures one can also express the property Valentin Goranko of a computation to visit infinitely often its starting state.
Fragments of Halpern-Shohamas interval logic  Every subset of the 12 Allenas relations (excl.
the equality) defines a fragment of HS.
Thus 4096 fragments arise; of them over 1000 expressively distinct.
([D. Della Monica, A. Montanari, VG., G. Sciavicco, IJCAIa 2011]: in strict semantics there are 1347 expressively distinct fragments.)
We denote fragments by listing the letters representing the occurring modalities, e.g.
BE , OAA, etc.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Sharpening the undecidability: early results An inspection of the formulae in the constriction shows that any of the fragments ABE and ABE suffices for these reductions.
By refining Halpern and Shohamas reduction, Lodaya proved in Kamal Lodaya Sharpening the Undecidability of Interval Temporal Logic.
ASIAN 2000, volume 1961 of LNCS, pages 290-298.
Springer, 2000.  the following: Theorem The BE -fragment of HS is undecidable over the classes of dense linear interval structures, and consequently, over all linear interval structures.
Corollary The interval logic with aChopa alone is undecidable over the classes of all (dense) linear interval structures.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of temporal logics via tiling  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  The Integer Grid Tiling Problem (IGTP) Tile: a asquarea with coloured sides: hcup , cright , cdown , cleft i.
The N A N - tiling Problem: Given a finite set of tile types T = {t1 , .
.
.
, tk } of unlimited supply, can it be applied to tile the integer plane N A N by matching the respective colors of adjacent tiles?
Theorem[Berger, 1966] The Integer Grid Tiling Problem is undecidable.
TIMEa2012  The reason: there exist sets of tiles that can only tile the plane aperiodically.
Valentin Goranko  Aperiodic tiling: example  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Applications of tiling problems to logical undecidability/complexity David Harel Recurring Dominoes: Making the Highly Undecidable Highly Understandable Ann.
Disc.
Math.
24 (1985), 51-72.
Reduction from the IGTP can be used to prove plain undecidability, i.e.
non-recursiveness, but recursive enumerability.
Tiling can also be used to prove IL11 -hardness, by reduction from the recurrent Tiling problem, asking for existence of tiling in which a given tile occurs infinitely often in the first row.
There are many decidable tiling problems.
Polynomial reduction to them can be used to prove complexity results.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Generic proof of undecidability via tiling  Proving undecidability via reduction from the IGTP of a logic L: 1.
Construct a formula GRID in L setting the grid.
2.
Construct formulae in L describing the tiles in a given tile set.
3.
Construct a formula in L describing correct tiling.
4.
Translate any tiling problem to satisfiability of a formula of L.  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Early undecidability via tiling results in temporal logic Sample results in [Harela85]: satisfiability in each of the following is IL11 -hard by reduction from the recurrent Tiling problem: aV Quantified LTL(X,F), aV 2-dimensional LTL(X,F), aV the temporal spatial logic combining LTL(X,F) with K4.
Edith Spaan Complexity of modal logics Ph.
D. Thesis.
University of Amsterdam, 1993  Proves undecidability and IL11 -hardness via tiling of the satisfiability of various modal logics; in particular, logics obtained from decidable ones by extending with universal modality.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  An easy proof of undecidability via tiling Consider the two-dimensional temporal logic X 2 with anexta operators for each of the 4 directions hai, hai, hai, hai, as well as a global modality, interpreted over the integer grid.
Then there is a straightforward encoding of IGTP, following Mark Reynolds Two-dimensional temporal logic Proc.
of Logic Colloquium a96, Springer-Verlag, 1998, pp.
219-236.
1.
The formula GRID is not necessary, only needed to indicate the origin, by AZhai> aSS AZhai>.
2.
Every tile D is treated as an atomic proposition.
3.
The formula describing correct tiling is: [U]  a _ D aT  TIMEa2012  DaSS  ^ D 6=D 0  AZ(D aSSD 0 ) aSS  ^  up(D )6=down(D 0 )  AZ(D aSShaiD 0 ) aSS  ^  AT AZ(D aSShaiD 0 )  right(D )6=left(D 0 )  4.
The tiling problem readily translates into satisfiability of the Valentin Goranko conjunction of the above in N A N.  A difficult proof of undecidability via tiling of the Compass Logic Compass Logic [Venemaa90]: a two-dimensional modal logic interpreted on products of two linear orders, with modal operators for each coordinate direction.
NB: no anext timea operators.
Yet: Theorem[Marx and Reynoldsa1997] The satisfiability in the compass logic is undecidable.
Maarten Marx and Mark Reynolds Undecidability of the compass logic Journal of Logic and Computation, 9(6), 1997, pp.
897-914.
Proof by elaborated encoding of the tiling problem.
NB: high undecidability on N A N was proved earlier by Spaan, by reduction from the recurrence problem for NTM, in:  TIMEa2012  Edith Spaan Nexttime is not necessary Proc of TARKa1990, 241-256  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of hybrid logic with binders via tiling  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Digression: hybrid logics  Hybrid modal/temporal logics bring useful features of first-order logic into modal logic, thus boosting the expressiveness of ML without affecting its good computational properties.
Historical origins: Prior and Bull, in tense logic.
Explicitly developed since the early 1980as.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Main hybrid logic features aV Nominals: referring to single worlds in the model.
Intuition: time stamps, aclock variablesa.
Formally: (W , R, V ), u  i iff V (i) = u aV Universal/global modality: referring to all worlds in the model:  M, u  [U]D iff M, w  D for every w a M. aV Satisfaction operators: refer to the truth at a named world:  (W , R, V ), u  @i D iff (W , R, V ), V (i)  D. aV State variables: like nominals, but with no fixed interpretation.
Assigned values by a separate variable assignment and used for reference to earlier stored possible worlds.
aV Reference pointers/binders: refer to the current world.
as D means: aD is true if the current world is assigned to sa.
TIMEa2012  Formally: M, g , u as D iff M, g [s a u], u  D, where g [s a u] is the assignment g , modified by assigning u to g (s).
Valentin Goranko  Examples on the expressiveness with binders aV The difference modality is definable in H([U], a):  [D]D = as [U](AZs a D).
aV Nominals can be modelled H([U], a):  NOM(D) = hUi(D aSS [D]AZD)  aV Until and Since are definable in the tense hybrid logic Ht (a):  pUq =as (Fq aSS (H(Ps a p))), and likewise for Since.
aV Until is definable even in H(@, a):  pUq =as 3 at (q aSS @s 2(3t a p)).
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of H([U], a) via tiling Theorem[G.,1994] The satisfiability in H([U], a) is undecidable, by reduction from the Integer Grid Tiling Problem.
Valentin Goranko Temporal Logic with Reference Pointers, Proc.
of ICTLa94, Springer, LNAI 827, 1994, pp.
133-148.
Later, strengthened [Areces, Blackburn, and Marx, 1999] to undecidability of H(@, a).
The encoding is not straightforward, but is quite intuitive: the formula GRID(p, q) says that every point of the model has exactly two successors: at one of them the value of p changes and the value of q remains the same (the move ato the righta), while at the other (the move aupwardsa) the opposite happens.
Moreover, the routes aright;upa and aup;righta converge.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Setting the Grid in H([U], a) D1  =  [U]((p aSS q a F (p aSS AZq) aSS F (AZp aSS q) aSS G ((p aSS AZq) a" (AZp aSS q))) aSS (p aSS AZq a F (p aSS q) aSS F (AZp aSS AZq) aSS G ((p aSS q) a" (AZp aSS AZq))) aSS (AZp aSS q a F (AZp aSS AZq) aSS F (p aSS q) aSS G ((AZp aSS AZq) a" (p aSS q))) aSS (AZp aSS AZq a F (AZp aSS q) aSS F (p aSS AZq) aSS G ((AZp aSS q) a" (p aSS AZq)))),  D2  =  [U] as ((p aSS q a [U](Fs a G (p aSS q a s))) aSS (p aSS AZq a [U](Fs a G (p aSS AZq a s))) aSS (AZp aSS q a [U](Fs a G (AZp aSS q a s))) aSS (AZp aSS AZq a [U](Fs a G (AZp aSS AZq a s)))),  D3  =  [U] as ((p aSS q a [U]((AZp aSS AZq aSS FFs) a GG (p aSS q a s))) aSS (p aSS AZq a [U]((AZp aSS q aSS FFs) a GG (p aSS AZq a s))) aSS (AZp aSS q a [U]((p aSS AZq aSS FFs) a GG (AZp aSS q a s))) aSS (AZp aSS AZq a [U]((p aSS q aSS FFs) a GG (AZp aSS AZq a s)))).
GRID(p, q) = p aSS q aSS D1 aSS D2 aSS D3  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Describing the tiles in PL Consider a tiling problem with a set of tiles T = {t1 , ..., tm } with colours C = {c1 , ..., ck }.
Every tile has four sides: aupa, adowna, alefta and arighta, each coloured in one of the colours from C .
To every colour ci we assign four propositional variables ui (aupa), di (adowna), li (alefta), and ri (arighta).
Each tile t with sides aupa, adowna, alefta and arighta coloured respectively in ci1 , ci2 , ci3 , and ci4 , we represent by the formula ^ ^ ^ ^ I,t = (ui1 aSS AZuj ) aSS (di2 aSS AZdj ) aSS (li3 aSS AZlj ) aSS (ri4 aSS AZrj ).
j6=i1  TIMEa2012  j6=i2  j6=i3  j6=i4  Valentin Goranko  Describing the tiling in H([U],G ) Now we define the formulae: COVERT = [U](  m _  I,i )  i=1  which says that the model is properly tiled, i.e.
every point in the model is covered by exactly one tile.
MATCHUP = [U](  k ^  (ui a (p aSS q a G (p aSS AZq a di )) aSS  i=1  (p aSS AZq a G (p aSS q a di )) aSS (AZp aSS q a G (AZp aSS AZq a di )) aSS (AZp aSS AZq a G (AZp aSS q a di )))), which says that the colour aupa of each tile of the cover matches the colour adowna of the one above it; TIMEa2012  Likewise, MATCHRIGHT is defined.
Valentin Goranko  Translating the tiling problem in H([U], a)  Finally, we put IST := GRID aSS COVERT aSS MATCHUP aSS MATHCHRIGHT Theorem IST is satisfiable if and only if N A N can be properly tiled by T .
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  More undecidability via tiling The undecidability result uses the relative strength of the language H([U], a) but no special properties of the models.
A number of similar results were established in the 1990s.
For instance [Spaan, 1996]: athere is a uni-modal, decidable, finitely axiomatizable, and canonical logic for which adding the universal modality causes undecidability and for which adding the reflexive transitive closure modality causes high undecidability.a Edith (Spaan) Hemaspaandra The Price of Universality, Notre Dame J.
Formal Logic Volume 37, Number 2 (1996), 174-203.
See also Spaanas PhD thesis, as well as many more undecidable polymodal logics in:  TIMEa2012  Marcus Kracht Highway to the Danger Zone, Journal of Logic and Computation, vol.
5(1996), pp.
93-109.
Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of interval temporal logics by reduction from the Octant Tiling Problem  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  The Octant Tiling Problem The 2nd octant of Z A Z: O = {(i, j) : i, j a N aSS 0 a$?
i a$?
j}  A natural interpretation of intervals on N into O.
The Octant Tiling Problem: can a given finite set of tile types T = {t1 , .
.
.
, tk } tile O while respecting the color constraints?
Theorem The Octant Tiling Problem is undecidable.
TIMEa2012  Proof: by reduction from the tiling problem for N A N, using KoEnigas Lemma.
Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of interval logics via tiling: generic construction  Given a finite set of tiles, we consider a signature containing, inter alia, special propositional letters u, tile, Id, t1 , .
.
.
, tk , cbb, cbe, ceb, corr, and possibly others.
The letters ti represent the tiles.
The tiling framework is set by forcing the existence of a (usually unique) infinite chain of unit-intervals (u-intervals) on the linear order, which covers an initial segment of the interval model.
Unit intervals are used to place tiles and delimiting symbols.
Then, ID-intervals are introduced to represent the layers of tiles.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of the interval logics via tiling: generic construction contad  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of the interval logics via tiling: generic construction contad  Each ID-interval must have the right number of tiles, and they must match horizontally: the Right-Neightbour relation.
The most challenging part usually is to ensure that the consecutive ID-intervals match vertically: the Above-Neightbour relation.
For that, we use several auxiliary propositional letters to refine and implement the idea of corr: cbb for matching the beginning point of a tile to the beginning point of the corresponding tile above; cbe, for matching beginning point with ending point above, and ceb for matching ending point with a beginning point above.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of the interval logics via tiling: generic construction completed Eventually, we encode the given Octant tiling problem by specifying the matching conditions between adjacent tiles.
The specific part of the construction is to use the given fragment of HS to set the chain of unit intervals and to express all necessary properties of IDs, the propositional letters for correspondence intervals, and the tile matching conditions.
For instance, using the After modality A the matching conditions can be expressed as follows, where [F ]p := [A]p aSS [A][A]p: _  [F ]((tile aSS hAitile) a  (ti aSS hAitj )),  right(ti )=left(tj )  [F ](hAitile a TIMEa2012  _ up(ti )=down(tj )  (hAiti aSS hAi(cbb aSS hAitj ))) Valentin Goranko  A sample result using the Octant Tiling problem: undecidability of the logic O over (discrete) linear orderings  Semantics of the Overlap operator O: M, [a, b] |= hOiD iff there exist c, d such that a < c < b < d and M, [c, d]  D. a  b c  TIMEa2012  d  Valentin Goranko  Encoding the Octant  a t u u k  TIMEa2012  a t u u k  k  a t u u  t u k  k  k  t u k  a t u u  t u k  k  k  t u k  t u k  a u  t u k  k  k  Valentin Goranko  Encoding the Octant u- and k-intervals of length 2  u-intervals a beginu -intervals a  a  b  c  a  d e  b  c  d  e  f  f  beginu -intervals cannot overlap beginu -intervals starting inside the same u-interval  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Encoding the Above-Neighbour Relation  b t15 t25 t35 t45 t55  up relb a AZhOiup relb  f t14 t24 t34 t44  up relf a AZhOiup relf  b t13 t23 t33 f t12 t22 b t11  TIMEa2012  b {z z }|  }|f  a t1 ua tu1  a t2 t2 ua tu1 tu2  {z  b }|  {z  a t3 t3 t3 ua tu3 tu2 tu1  }|f  {  a t4 t4 t4 t4 ua tu1 tu2 tu3 tu4  a ua  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of the logic O over discrete linear orderings In the long run, for every finite set of tiles T we build a formula DT a O such that DT is satisfiable in a discrete linear ordering iff T can tile the 2nd octant.
Theorem[Bresolin, Della Monica, G., Montanari, Sciavicco, 2009] The satisfiability problem for the logic O is undecidable over any class of discrete linear orderings that contains at least one linear ordering with an infinite ascending sequence.
Likewise for O, on classes having infinite descending sequences.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  More recent results on undecidability of interval logics Using variations of the Octant Tiling Problem encoding: Theorem The satisfiability problem for each of the HS fragments O, O, AD, AD, AD, AD, BE, BE, BE, BE, is undecidable in any class of linear orders that contains at least one linear order with length greater than n, for each n > 0.
D. Bresolin, D. Della Monica, V. Goranko, A. Montanari, G. Sciavicco The dark side of Interval Temporal Logic: sharpening the undecidability border Proc.
of TIMEa2011  O and O were the first uni-modal fragments of HS proved undecidable over the class of discrete orderings.
A recent last blow by Marcinkowski and Michaliszyn (LICSa2011): undecidability of D and D over discrete linear orderings.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  More recent results on undecidability of interval logics D. Bresolin, D. Della Monica, A. Montanari, P. Sala, G. Sciavicco Interval Temporal Logics over Finite Linear Orders: the Complete Picture Proc.
of ECAIa2012 Of the 1347 expressively different fragments of HS, only the following 35 and their symmetric versions are decidable over the class of finite linear orders:  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of temporalized logics  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Temporalizing logics Temporalization: combination of temporal and other logics, e.g.
: products, fusions, etc.
Marcelo Finger and Dov Gabbay Combining Temporal Logic Systems Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 37(2): 204-232 (1996)  Temporalization often leads to undecidability.
Three important case studies: aV Products of modal and temporal logics aV Temporal epistemic logics aV Temporal description logics TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of products of logics Dov Gabbay and Valentin Shehtman Products of Modal Logics, Part I L. J. of the IGPL, Vol.
6, No.
1, 1998, pp.
73-146 Frank Wolter The decision problem for combined (modal) logics Habilitationsschrift, Univ.
of Leipzig, 1999 Dov Gabbay, Agi Kurucz, Frank Wolter, and Michael Zakharyaschev.
Many-dimensional modal logics: theory and applications Elsevier, 2003.
Products of modal logics are massively undecidable.
For instance: aV ML(N A N) [Spaan, 1993]; K [U] A K [U] [Marx, 1999];  K 4.3 A K 4.3 [Reynolds and Zakharyaschev 1999]; aV Almost all three-dimensional modal/temporal logics.
Related to the undecidability of FO3 .
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Temporal-epistemic logics Combine temporal and multi-agent epistemic logics.
An important earlier work with detailed proof of undecidability by reduction from the Halting Problem for Turing machines: Richard Ladner and John Reif: The Logic of Distributed Protocols Proc of TARKa1986: 207-222  Various other developments during the 1980s.
Unifying study in: Joseph Halpern and Moshe Vardi The complexity of reasoning about knowledge and time I: Lower bounds Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 38(1), 1989, pp.195237 Joseph Halpern and Moshe Vardi The complexity of reasoning about knowledge and time: Synchronous systems IBM Research Report, 1989 TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  A variety of temporal-epistemic logics Semantics based on so called interpreted systems: sets of runs in a transition system with epistemic indistinguishability relations on the state space for each agents.
A variety of 96 logics, based on six parameters: aV number of agents (one or many), aV the language (with or without common knowledge, linear or  branching time, etc.
), aV recall abilities (no recall, bounded recall, perfect recall), aV learning abilities (learning or no learning), aV synchrony (synchronous or asynchronous), aV unique initial state.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Complexity of the validity in temporal-epistemic logics  Both linear and branching time logics involving more than one agents become highly undecidable (I 11 -complete) under some combined assumptions, e.g., of both unbounded memory and TIMEa2012 common knowledge.
Valentin Goranko  Sharpening the undecidability of temporal epistemic logics  Spaan showed that neither Nexttime nor Until are needed for most of these results, but the knowledge operator K and the temporal operator G suffice: Edith Spaan Nexttime is not necessary Proc of TARKa1990, 241-256  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of temporal description logics Description logics: very close to modal logics.
Involve concepts (unary predicates) and roles (binary predicates).
TBoxes: finite sets of concept inclusions.
Description logics can be temporalized in various ways: Alessandro Artale and Enrico Franconi A survey of temporal extensions of description logics, Annals of Math.
and Artificial Intelligence, vol.
30, 2000, pp.171a210.
Many undecidability consequences from Halpern-Shoham results.
Many more undecidability results for temporal description logics in: Frank Wolter The decision problem for combined (modal) logics Habilitationsschrift, Univ.
of Leipzig, 1999 TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of temporal description logics, contad More recent undecidability results for quite weak fragments in: Carsten Lutz, Frank Wolter and Michael Zakharyaschev Temporal Description Logics: A Survey, Proc.
of TIMEa2008, pp.3-14  ALC is the basic propositionally closed description logic.
Theorem Concept satisfiability in LTLALC w.r.t.
T-Boxes and with a single rigid (over time) role is IL11 -hard.
Proof: by reduction from the recurrent tiling problem: given a set of tile types T , decide whether it can tile N A N so that a given tile t appears infinitely often in the first row.
Also: concept satisfiability in LTLSHIQ with rigid roles and without TBoxes is undecidable.
Proof: by reduction from Postas Correspondence Problem.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of quantitative temporal logics  TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Real-time extensions of temporal logics R. Alur and T. Henzinger Logics and models of real-time: a survey Real-Time: Theory in Practice, Proc.
REX Workshop 1991, Springer, 1992, vol.
600 of LNCS, pp.
74106.
Real-time extensions of temporal logics: aV time-bounded operators:  G (p a F=10 q) aV freeze quantification: very similar to hybrid binders: binds a  variable x to the current time, e.g.
: Gx.
(p a Fy .
(q aSS y a$?
x + 3) aV time variables and quantification, e.g.
:  axG (p aSS T = x a F (q aSS T a$?
x + 3) TIMEa2012  Timed transition systems and timed automata.
Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of metric temporal logics Ron Koymans Specifying real-time properties with metric temporal logic Real-time Systems 2(4), 255299 (1990)  MTL augments the LTL operators with time bounded operators.
R. Alur and T. Henzinger Real-time logics: Complexity and expressiveness Information and Computation, 104(1):3577, 1993.
Punctuality causes undecidability: e.g., on discrete orderings with addition and on dense orderings with constant increment operation.
Proof: by reduction from repeated reachability in Minsky machines.
A relaxed decidable version: MITL with interval constraints: G (p a F[2,10] q)  TIMEa2012  J. Ouaknine and J. Worrell.
Some recent results in Metric Temporal Logic Proc.
of FORMATSa2008, LNCS 5215.
Valentin Goranko  Undecidability of real-time logics  Timed propositional temporal logic TPTL: like LTL, but interpreted on time sequences and extended with freeze quantifiers.
R. Alur and T. Henzinger A really temporal logic Journal of the ACM 41:181-204, 1994.
Basic version decidable, but various extensions, e.g., time addition or multiplication by 2, or dense time domain cause I 11 -hardness.
TIMEa2012  Valentin Goranko  Summary: what causes undecidability in temporal logics?
Propositional temporal logics are generally decidable, but adding some syntactic or semantic features can make them explode.
Many important types of temporal logics are generally undecidable, even under very weak assumptions.
What are the typical causes of undecidability in temporal logics?
aV Grid-like models, many-dimensional or temporalized systems, aV Interval-based semantics, where truth of formulae is defined  on time intervals, with no locality assumptions.
aV Temporal operators along multiple (at least two) time-lines.
Products of simple temporal logics.
aV Time reference mechanisms, such as freeze quantifiers and  hybrid binders.
TIMEa2012  aV Arithmetic features: time addition, exact time constraints, etc.
Valentin Goranko  Conclusion: is there life beyond decidability?
Yes, of course.
Classical first-order logic is a witness.
Undecidability is bad, but how bad?
And, (how) should we care?
Possible ways out: aV Syntactic restrictions, identifying decidable fragments  (e.g.
FO2 , guarded fragments, etc.)
aV Suitable parametric restrictions, e.g.
on number of  propositional variables, depth of nesting, etc.
Maurice Margenstern Frontier between decidability and undecidability: a survey Theoretical Computer Science, vol.
231, no.
2, 2000, pp.
217-251  aV Semantic restrictions, ataminga the semantics.
E.g.
: locality.
aV Semi-decision procedures, e.g.
resolution or tableaux.
TIMEa2012  aV Using heuristics and human-computer interaction, etc.
Valentin Goranko  PostScriptum: Terminator vs Turing  Terminator: research project at Microsoft Research, Cambridge, focused on the development of automatic methods for proving program termination and general liveness properties.
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/cambridge/projects/terminator/  See article aTerminator Tackles an Impossible Taska http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/news/features/terminator.aspx  So, can the theoretically undecidable be practically decided?
The future will tell.
Maybe.
TIMEa2012  The end  Valentin Goranko