Temporal Reasoning with Aspelctual Adverbs Alice G.B.
ter Meulen Centerfor Language and Cggnition Universiteit Groningen  Hans Smessaert Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Chderzoek Katholieke Universiteit.Leuven In dynamic semantics the dynamic information in (3b)  1.
Introduction  .
changes the information state created by (3a): some of it is updated, whereas other information is not affected.
The valid conclusion in (3c) preserves the focus information of (3a) ('slower than expected'), whereas in (3d) ii.
is not preserved.
Established expectations and attitudes are generally not affected when new factual information becomes available.
This paper proposes a dynamic semantics of such temporal inferences, determiring what is updated in the interpretation and what information is preserved.
In order to capture the various informational dimensions involved in this dynamic reasoning a basic polarity grid is proposed, generalizing the distinction between positive and negative polarity of event -types.
Corresponding to this polarity grid, a binary bit-string calculus is introduced, which is three-dimensional for the aspectual adverbs in (l), but five-dimensional for the focus aspectual adverbs in (2).
This calculus serves first to characterize valid static temporal reasoning, i.e.
inferences which concern one and the same information state.
Valid dynamic.
temporal reasoning across changing contexts or information states, as illustrated in (3), is subsequently characterized by polarity reversal operations in this calculus.
Adverbs are aspectual when they refer to or quantify over the intemal structure of an event.
They may refer to the onset of an event, as in (la-b) and (2ab), describing John's current action as related to its starting point, or to its end, as in ( l a d ) and (2 c-d), describing John's current action as related to its termination.
(1) a. John was not yet reading.
b. John was already reading.
c. John w a s still reading.
John was not reading anymore.
d. Aspectual focus adverbs, marked in English with specific stress and high pitch prosody, induce additional semantic complexity, contributing information about expected alternatives in various temporal parameters, as in (2).
(2) a. John was STILL not reading.
b. John was alREADY reading.
c. John was STLL reading.
d. John was NO LONGER reading.
In using aspectual focus adverbs the position of the current temporal reference point in the course of events is contrasted to later or earlier altematives.
With already in (2b) and no longer in (2d) the actual course of events is evaluated by the speaker as faster than expected.
With still not in (2a) and still in (2c), in contrast, the actual course of events is evaluated as slower than expected This tension between actual value and expected value is absent in the four regular aspectual adverbs not yet in (la), the unstressed use of already and still in (Ib, c) and with not ... anymore in (W. Our central aim is to account for the validity of reasoning patterns involving focus adverbs in contexts where the temporal reference point may change during the process of interpretation of the premises.
Consider the inference in (3), where the premises (3a, b) are presented in the order indicated, and (3c) is a valid conclusion (indicated by I=) , but (3d) is invalid (indicated by If).
(3) a. John is still not asleep.
b. John is asleep.
I= John is finally asleep.
c. If John is already asleep.
d.  2.
Adverbs of aspect 2.1 The 3-D representation .
Starting point of our analysis is the basic distinction between the positive polarity in (4a) and negative polarity in (4b), which is labeled POL^" DIMENSION A in (5): (4) a. John is asleep <sleep, j, + > bl.
John is not asleep <sleep, j, - > ( 5 ) polarity dimension A actual polarity A= 1 positive polarity: property is currently true a=0 negative polarity: property is currently false With already in (lb) and still in (IC)the actual polarity is positive (i.e.
the current temporal reference point is located within the sleeping-event), whereas with not yet in (la) and nor anymore in (Id) the actual polarity is negative (i.e.
the current temporal reference point is  28 0-7695-11074/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE  located before or after the sleeping-event, respectively).
However, these adverbs also involve two other polarity dimensions, namely the o d o f ftransition represented in dimension B (6), and the speaker's perspective on the event, represented in dimension C (7).
(6) polarity dimension B: event-internal polarity transition B=l beginning: transition fiom negative to positive polarity B=O fishing: transition from positive to negative polarity (7) polarity dimension C: speaker's perspective in describing the event C=l retrospective: looking backward to a past transition c=o prospective:  looking forward to a hture transition If (la) is true, John is now not sleeping, but his falling asleep is imminent.
If (lb) is true, John is now sleeping and he has just fallen asleep.
Accordingly, the positive B-polarity of beginning (i.e.
falling asleep) holds for not yet in (la) and already in (lb).
The negative Bpolarity of finishing (i.e.
waking up) holds for still in (IC) and not anymore in (Id), as (IC) entails not only that John is now asleep, but also that his waking up is ahead; similarly, (Id) entails that John is not now asleep and his waking up is past.
Looking back to the past event, the retrospective adverbs already in (lb) and not anymore in (Id) get positive C-polarity, whereas the prospective ones, not yet in (la) and still in (IC)get negative C-polarity.
The polarity assignments are summarized in the 3-D grid in (8):  3-D POLARITY GRID John is asleep John is not asleep  but rather a 'matter of mutual predictability: given the assignment of any combination of two parameters, the value of the third parameter can be predicted.
The composition of the paraphrases of not yet asleep as will start sleeping or will fall asleep, or in that of not asleep anymore as having finished sleeping or having woken up can straightforwardly be derived from the three different polarity dimensions, as in (9).
(9) a. not yet asleep start sleeping (B=l) not sleeping (A=O) will be sleeping (C=O) An important observation in connection with the polarity grid in (8) is that, although the interaction of three binary parameters yields eight logical possibilities (23), only four of them are realized.
Since the presuppositions of start and finish constrain combinations with the A polarity, e.g., in order to start some activity you must not now be engaged in it, the three dimensions are not logically independent.
If the combinations 11 and 00 are called CONVERGENT, and 10 and 01 DIVERGENT, these constraints can be formulated as the entailments in (10-12).
(10) [ (AB = convergent) => (C = 1) 3 and [ (AB = divergent) => (C = 0) ] (1 1) [ (AC = convergent) => (B = 1) ] and [ (AC = divergent) => (B = 0) ] (12) [ (BC = convergent) => (A = 1) ] and [ (BC = divergent) => (A = 0) ] This reveals a certain logical redundancy in the 3-D polarity grid, as two binary parameters would suffice to distinguish four expressions.
But it is not a configuration of primary versus secondary parameters,  2.2 Static temporal reasoning Representing the meaning of aspectual adverbs in the 3-D grid of polarities leads to a straightfomard and intuitively appealing calculus of temporal inferences.
Some simple static inferences, concerning one and the same context, are given in (13) and (14), where the aspectual adverb is eliminated for a simple polarity to remain in the conciusion.
(13) a. John is already asleep (=John is asleep b. John is still asleep I= John is asleep (14) a. John is not yet asleep I= John is not asleep b. John is not asleep anymore I= John is not asleep The validity of these inferences obviously depends on the preservation of the A-polarity.
The sentences containing an aspectual adverb with a positive Apolarity, i.e.
already (111) in (13a) and still (100) in (13b), entail the positive polarity sentence without aspectual adverbial.
Those having an adverbial with negative A-value, i.e.
not yet (010) in (14a) and not anymore (001) in (14b), entail the elementary negative polarity sentence.
29  while preserving the third in temporal reasoning, both yielding invalid pattems.
(19) A B C a.John was not yet asleep.O 1 0 b.John fell asleep 0/1 c.l# John wasstill asleep 1 0 0 c'.l# John was not asleep anymore 0 0 1 Although in (19c) the A-value of the actual polarity is reversed with stiN, the prospectivity of the C-parameter is not changed accordingly.
Instead, the B-transition of beginning is replaced by that of finishing, hence jumping forward, as it were, too far within the event for a valid inference.
An even bigger jump forward occurs in (19c'): although the C-value is switched to retrospectivity, the actual polarity of the A-parameter is not, while the B-parameter is switched from beginning to finishing.
As a consequence, two A-polarity transitions are crossed in one move, resulting in an invalid inference.
If (19c') were not a conclusion based on an inference, but rather added as new information, it would ciiuse the polarity in A to be reversed again, and switch tlhe B-dimension to the endpoint (waking up), and adjusting accordingly the C-dimension to retrospective.
This constitutes a perfectly acceptable dynamic update after (19 a + b).
This is an important illustration of how the 3-D calculus models the difference between inferred information -and new information used for an update, conflated in other systems of dynamic temporal semantics (e.g.
DRT).
Another invalid inference on the basis of the two premisses in (19a-b) is given in (20): (20) A B C a. John was not yet asleep.
0 1 0 b.John fell asleep 011 c. I# John was already asleep.1 1 1 Strictly speaking the inference in (20c) runs perfectly parallel to that in (17-18): A and C are reversed, whereas B remains constant.
However, the retrospective character of already conflict with the prospective character of (20a) and the presuppositions of (20b:), all three of which concem the polarity of John's falling asleep.
Presupposition accommodation apparently succumbs to dynamic updates of factual information in temporal inferences.
A second type of static temporal reasoning relates to the intemal negation of aspectual adverbs.
A polarity reversal can be neutralized, if the original verbal predicate, e.g.
sleep in (13-14) is simultaneously substituted by its contradictory predicate be awakq yielding an equivalence relation between still and not yet in (15), and between already and not anymore in (16).
(15) a. John is not yet asleep e John is still awake b. John is still asleep e John is not yet awake (16) a. John is already asleep e John is not awake anymore John is not asleep anymore b. John is already awake  2.3 Dynamic temporal reasoning Static and dynamic temporal reasoning differ in that the latter crucially requires the update in information states to include the transition of the temporal reference point to a later one.
The general pattem used for this type of reasoning takes as its first premiss the description with an aspectual adverb of a state holding at the first temporal reference point.
The second premiss, presented later, indicates that a A-polarity transition took place at a later temporal reference point.
The conclusion must contain a different aspectual adverbial describing the resulting state.
Consider the dynamic inference pattem in ( 17).
(17) a. John was still asleep.
b. John woke up.
I= John was not asleep anymore.
c. In order to account for the validity of (17) we need to distinguish between information which is modified or updated from one information state to the next, and information which remains stable across information states.
In the 3-D representation the question is which parameters change their values from still in (17a) to not anymore in (17c).
The second premiss in (17b), introducing a polarity transition, obviously switches C from 0 (i.e.
prospectively looking towards a future falling asleep) to 1 (i.e.
retrospectively looking back upon a realized falling asleep).
From the constraints in (10-12) we know that as soon as the value for one parameter is reversed, the value of one (and only one) of the other two parameters must be reversed as well.
In this case, the reversal of the C-parameter correlates with the A-parameter for the actual polarity.
The value of the B-parameter, however, must be kept constant.
In other words, temporal reasoning can only concem one single polarity transition consisting of adjacent and opposite polarities.
The temporal inference in (17), reversing the A- and C-values while preserving the Bvalue, is schematically represented in (18): A B C (18) a. still asleep 1 0 0 b. wakeup 1/0 c. not asleep anymore 0 0 1 The examples in (19) illustrate the other two combinatorial possibilities of changing two values,  3.
Adverbs of aspectual focus 3.1 The 5-D representation Within the 3-D polarity system in section 2, the two adverbs not yet and still not in (21) would both be assigned 010, as the two adverbs not anymore and no longer in (22), both getting 00 1.
(21) a. John was not yet reading.
bl.
John was STILL not reading.
(22) a. John was not reading anymore.
John was no LONGER reading.
bl.
The focus dimension which distinguishes STILL not in (21b) from not yet in (21a) introduces the focus meaning SLOWER THAN EXPECTED, that cannot be represented in the 3-D polarity system.
Similarly, the focus meaning FASTER THAN EXPECTED, which 30  distinguishes no LONGER in (22b) from not anymore in (22a) remains unaccounted for.
Therefore, two new polarity dimensions are added to the grid in (23) and (24), each capturing the focus meaning of expected alternatives.
(23) polarity dimension D: evaluation of speed D=l positive focus course of events is earliedfaster than expected D=O negative focus course of events is later/slower than expected (24) polarity dimension E: expected alternative is counterfactual  I  E=l primary focus expected polarity is opposite to the actual polarity in A E=O secondary focus expected polarity is identical to the actual polarity in A The meaning of the focus adverbs in (21b) and (22b) is captured in terms of a 5-D system, whereas their counterparts in (21a) and (22a) only get assigned a three-dimensional bit-string.
The simple and focus assignments to aspectual adverbs are integrated in the table in (25):  1 5-D POLARITY GRID  I  A  I  I  IDI  E  John is asleep John is not asleep John is not yet asleep John is already asleep John is still asleep John is not asleep anymore  (A=O) not sleeping start sleeping @=I) in hture (C=O) faster than expected (W-1) expecting awake (E=O) b. finally awake (A=O) not sleeping (B=O) end sleeping in the past (C=l) slower than expected(D=O) (E=O) expecting awake The table in (25) shows that the two focus parameters, D and E, are logically independent: all four combinatory binary assignments to DE -- i.e.
00, 0 1, 10 and 11 - are realized.
If the values for DE are composed with the C-parameter, however, only four of the eight logical CDE combinations turn out to be available.
Interestingly, the constraints formulated in terms of convergent (1 1 or 00) versus divergent (0 1 or  The English aspectual focus adverbs form a quite richly lexicalized system, though other natural languages may constitute even richer lexicalized aspectual systems (cf.
Smessaert (1999a)).
If the polarity the speaker expected matches the A polarity, the speaker's evaluation of the speed of the action is expressed lexically, by using already almost if it is faster than expected (D=l), and$naZZy if it is slower than expected (D=O).
To convey counterfactual speaker's expectations conflicting in A and D, a focus adverb with prosodic marking must be used.
(26) a. John is already almost asleep b. John is finally asleep c. John is already almost awake d. John is finally awake.
To illustrate the assignments of 01010 to already almost and 00100 toJinally P their paraphrases are decomposed in (27a-b): (27) a. already almost asleep  31  (00111) in (34b), entail the elementary negative polarity sentence.
The original inferences from ABC to A in (12-13) could also be paraphrased informally as "ignore the last two parameters, but preserve everything else".
The same instruction can be applied to the 5-D representation: in addition to the inferences from ABCDE to A in (32-33), a second type of inferences reduces ABCDE to ABC,i.e.
from a focus adverbial to a simple aspectual adverbial.
In other words, eliminating the focus parameters DE, but preserving the AB42 values yields a valid inference, as is illustrate'din (34) and (35) below.
(34) a. John is already almost awake =:> John is still asleep b. John is STILL asleep = > John is still asleep (35) a. John is STILL not asleep =.> John is not yet asleep b. John is already awake => John is not asleep anymore Both (34a) and (34b) preserve the ABC values in the 5D representation, 10010 and 10001 iespectively, while reducing to the 3-D representation o STILL, 100.
Similarly, the 010 assignment of not yet in (35a) is preserveld in the 5-D of STILL not, i.e.
01001, whereas the 001 of not anymore is preserved in the 00111 assignment of already not-P.
The inference in (36a), which is trivial, and that in (36b), which yields a focus contlict, do preserve in both cases the ABC values of 111 are preserved, but indicate that the meta-logical constraints of non-triviality and consistent expectations should already rule them out from the valid patterns.
(36) a.John is ALREADY asleep => John is already asleep b John is finally asleep IfJohn is already asleep The mechanism of intemal negation naturally extends to the domain of focus adverbs, where the AB values are switched, but the CDE-parameters are preserved.
Consider the equivalences in (37) and (38) where the predicate-substitution neutralizes the intemal negation on the adverbs.
(37) a. John is STILL not asleep @John is STILL awake b. John is STILL asleep e>John is STILL not awake (38) a John is already almost asleep @ John is already almost no longer awake b. John is already almost no longer asleep @John is already almost awake Aspectual adverbs may not freely be composed in ordinary English, as the complex already almost no longer P is far less natural than its equivalent already almost not-P in (38 a, b).
10) polarities in the analogous case with 3-D ABC in (10-12) can be applied to the 5-D grid as well.
Consider the entailments in (28) to (30) : (28) [ (DE = convergent) => (C = 1) ] & [ (DE = divergent) => (C = 0) I (29) [ (CE = convergent) => (D = 1) ] & [ (CE = divergent) => (D = 0) ] (30) [ (CD = convergent) => (E = 1) ] & [ (CD = divergent) => (E = 0) ] The key entailments here are those in (28), since they can be codlated with the ones in (10) to yield the 5-D constraints in (3 1): (3 1) [(ABconvergent)=>(C=l)=>(DE convergent)] [(AB divergent) => (C=O) => (DE divergent)] The fact that only eight out of the thirty-two logical possibilities (2' = 32) for a 5-D representation are available in (25) is the result of multiplying the ABCrestrictions in (10) with the CDE-restrictions in (28).
The pivotal role of the C-parameter of speaker's perspective (i.e.
prospectivity versus retrospectivity) in formulating these restrictions will be c o n f i i e d by its role in accounting for dynamic temporal reasoning in section 3.3.
Although the entailments in (31) still reveal a certain redundancy in the 5-D polarity grid, since three binary parameters suffice to distinguish eight expressions, it is, once again, not a configuration of primary versus secondary parameters, but rather a matter of mutual predictability: given the assignment of any combination of three parameters, other than ABC or CDE, the value of the fourth and fifth parameter can be predicted.
This may be regarded as a certain amount of 'semantic redundancy' in ordinary language signals, which safeguards human informational exchanges for misunderstandings and alleviates the hearer's information processing load.
3.2 Static temporal reasoning  As was already demonstrated with the simple adverbs in the first section, the- key advantage of the polarity represention of the meaning of aspectual adverbs is that it allows a straightforward account of temporal inferences.
With the static inferences, which concem one single context, the most trivial examples are those whose validity depends on the preservation of the Apolarity.
The examples given in (32) and (33) are the focus counterparts of the simple inferences in (12) and (13) and the lexicalization of not d e e p as awake: (32) a. John is'already almost awake => John is asleep b. John is STILL asleep => John is asleep (33) a. John is STILL not asleep => John is not asleep b. John is already awake => John is not asleep The sentences containing a focus adverbial with A = 1, such as aIready almost notlP (awake) (10010) in (32a) and STILL (10001) in (32b), entail the positive polarity sentence without aspectual adverbial (adverbial elimination).
Those having an adverbial with A= 0, such as STILL not (01001) in (33a) and already not-P  3.3 Dyniamic temporal reasoning  In dynamic temporal reasoning the crucial question is what information is modified or updated in going from one information state to the next, and what information is stable across information states.
Consider the valjd inference pattem in (39), where the first premiss 32  contains a focus adverbial, the second premiss induces a polarity transition in C, and the conclusion describes  the resulting state with a different focus adverbial  A B C D E a. John was still not asleep.
0 1 0 0 1 b. John fell asleep.
011 c. John was finally asleep.
1 1 1 0 0 .
As was observed with the dynamic inferences in (17) parameter (evaluation of speed) is unrelated to the A and (19), the A polarity transition in (39b) also causes a polarity, whereas the E-parameter is related to the A polarity (counterfactual expectation), it is obviously the switch of the C-value from 0 (prospectivitylfuture) to 1 (retrospectivity/past).
The constraints in (3 1) latter that is reversed along with the A- and C-values.
The set of validity conditions are summarized in (40): furthermore require that either the D- or the Eparameter is reversed, but not both.
Since the D(40) A dynamic temporal inference with focus adverbials is valid if and only if C = perspective 1. the C-value is switched fiom 0 to 1: 2. the A- and E-values are reversed A = actual polarity E = (c0unter)factuality of expectation 3. the B- and D-values are preserved B = polarity transition D = expectatiodevaluation finishing, instead of beginning (B= 0), and it has faster, Consider the inference in (41) which differs from (39) instead of slower, evaluation of speed @=1).
in two respects: it relates to the polarity transition of A B C D E (41) a. John was already almost awake.
1 0 0 1 0 b. John woke up.
110 c. John was already no longer asleep.
0 0 1 1 1 According to the constraints in (28)-(31) the reversal of possibilities, the other three being ACD, BCE and BCD.
The first two of these only deviate from the valid the C-value needs to be combined with that of either A ACE configuration in one dimension, whereas the or B (but not both), as well as with the reversal of either D or E (but again not both).
This means that the latter deviates in two dimensions.
The inferences in valid pattern of (41), which reverses the three ACE(42) illustrate the ACD and BCE pattern values, is only one out of four combinatorial (42) a. John was STILL not asleep.
0 1 0 0 1 b. John fell asleep.
011 c. If John was ALREADY asleep.
1 1 1 1 l(ACD) c'.
If John was finally awake.
0 0 1 0 O(BCE) parameter is preserved, switching B instead of A With already in (42c) A and C are properly reversed, crosses two polarity transitions in one step, i.e.
fiom but D (speed) is reversed, instead of E. As a consequence, the original negative evaluation being awake before falling asleep all the way into associated with STILL not, i.e.
LATER THAN EXPECTED, being awake &er subsequently waking up.
The invalid is incorrectly turned into the positive evaluation inference pattern in (43), which deviates from the valid associated with ALREADY.
However, this discrepancy ACE configuration both in A and E, combines the problems of (42c) and (42c'): the slow speed with respect to the E-parameter is definitely not as bad as the one with the A-parameter in (42c') withjnally evaluation is not maintained and two polarity not-P.
Although in this case the negative the Dtransitions are crossed simultaneously.
o 1 0 0 1 (43) a. John was still not asleep.
b. John fell asleep.
011 c. If John was already NO LONGER asleep.
0 0 1 1 l(BCD) The basic dynamic pattern of (39) can get a number of static extensions, as illustrated in (44): 0 1 0 0 1 (44) a. John was STILL not asleep.
o/ 1 b. John fell asleep.
c. John was finally asleep.
1 1 1 0 0 (ACE) d. John was finally no longer awake.
0 0 1 0 0 (AB+ P) d'.
John was already asleep.
1 1 1 (keep ABC) e. John was no longer awake.
0 0 1 (AB + P or keep ABC)  (39)  The chain of valid temporal reasoning demonstrates that the conclusion of the dynamic reasoning in (44c) can function as the top of a lattice structure, which represents the valid static reasoning patterns.
The focus construction in (44d) then represents the middle node on the left side, where the dynamic reversal of the ACE-values is followed by the static reversal of the AB-values in combination with the substitution of the  opposite predicate.
Hence, switching the adverbial BCE-values and negating the predicate yields a perfectly valid dynamic inference.
The sentence in (44d'), on the other hand, corresponds to the middle node on the right side: after the ACE-reversal one reduces the 5-D to the 3-D level, preserving the ABCvalues.
Finally, the sentence in (44e) constitutes the bottom of the lattice structure.
It is either the result of  33  reducing the focus in (44d) to a simple aspectual form, or else the result of reversing the AB-values and the predicate of the simple form in (448) .
References Kiinig E. 1991.
The meaning of Focus Particles.
London:  Routledge.
Liibner, S. 1989.
"German 'schon','erst', 'noch' : an integrated analysis".
Linguistics and Philosophy 12: 167-212.
Liibner, S. 1990.
Wahr neben Falsch.
Duale Operatoren als die Quantoren natiirlicher Sprache.
Tubingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag.
ter Meulen, A.G.B.
1995.
Representing Time in Natural Language.
The Dynamic Interpretation of Tense and Aspect.
Cambridge, Massachusetts, The MIT Press.
ter Meulen, A.G.B.
& Smessaert, H. 1994.
'Aspectual focus in English and Dutch', in Peter Bosch & Rob van der Sandt (eds.
), Focus and Natural Language Processing.
IBM Institute for Logic and Linguistics, Vol.
2 : Semantics, pp.
353-362.
Mittwoch, A.
1993.
"The relationship between schodalready and nocWstil1 : a reply to Liibner".
Natural Lang.
Semantics 2: 71-82.
Smessaert, H. 1997.
'Aspectual duality regained', in P. Dekker, M. Stokhof & Y. Venema (eds.).
Proceedings of the 11th Amsterdam Colloquium, 1997.
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation, Department of Philosophy, University of Amsterdam.
pp .271-276.
Smessaert, H. 1999a.
Perspectief en vergelijking.
Aspectuele partikels in het Nederlands.
Studies op het gebied van de Nederlandse Taallcunde 4.
Belgisch Interuniversitair centrum voor Neerlandistiek.
tJitgeverij Peeters, Leuven.
Smessaert, H. 1999b.
'Adverbs of aspectual focus and negation in Dutch'.
Belgian Journal of Linguistics 12.
34