Temporal Reasoning with Fuzzy Time-Objects Ernst G.P.
Bovenkamp and Jan C.A.
van der Lubbe Information Theory Group, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Technology Delft, Mekelweg 4, P.O.Box 5031, 2600 GA, Delft, The Netherlands.
email: { ernst ,vdlubbe}Qit .et .tudelft .nl Abstract  edge and uncertain facts are connected.
The time-fact relation is defined such that time and fact are independently represented in the time-object.
Such timeobjects are called separable.
Additionally it is thereby sometimes interesting to constrain the domain of a time-object such that a dependence relation between time and fact is established indirectly.
Such time-objects are called semi-separable if the constraint domain satisfies conditions as discussed in section 4.
Given (constrained) time-objects] these objects become instantiated in the process of reasoning.
This involves constraining time, fact and time-object in the light of available evidence, a process which will be explained in section 5.
Finally, reasoning with time-objects is considered in section 6.
There we will show how the instantiation of the premises of a temporal rule will lead t o the instantiated temporal conclusion.
It will also be shown that time and fact do have mutual influence in the reasoning scheme, while mixing of temporal and factual uncertainty is avoided.
A novel approach to temporal reasoning is proposed which deals with both uncertain facts and uncertain temporal information in fuzzy logic.
Fuzzy time-objects are defined to represent these uncertainties.
A point of particular concern when reasoning with both kinds of uncertainty is that temporal Uncertainty should not influence factual uncertainty.
On the other hand tem.poral reasoning is exactly about the relation between time and f a c t .
By introducing constrained time-objects we show that a relation between time and fact can be established while avoiding mixing of uncertainties.
Then a method t o reason with time-objects is introduced.
The inference relation between time-objects is thereby decomposed in a fact-fact and a time-time relation.
Such a decomposition is only allowed for (semi-) separable time-objects.
The decomposition does not prevent tame and fact to have mutual influence.
1  Introduction  Temporal reasoning with uncertainty has received growing attention over the past years.
Reasoning with both uncertain temporal information and uncertain facts has hardly been dealt with.
In section 2 we investigate how uncertainty is used in temporal reasoning approaches in literature.
It will be shown that there are in general two different outlooks on temporal reasoning with uncertainty.
It will also be shown that choosing either kind involves a commitment to quite different reasoning strategies.
Given the limitations of (2-dimensional) representations of temporal uncertainty in literature and the aim to represent both uncertainty about time and facts we propose 3-dimensional representations called timeobjects.
These time-objects] with a function similar to formal temporal logic connectives like 'OCCUR' and 'HOLD', are presented in section 3.
Through time-objects uncertain temporal knowl-  0-8186-7937-9/97 $10.00 0 1997 IEEE  2  Use of temporal uncertainty in related work  Many applications require the explicit representation of both uncertain facts and uncertain time.
Taking a measurement of some physical quantity] for example, can be both unprecise with respect t o the time of measurement as t o the measurement itself.
Another example is in the medical domain where a patient may give information about symptoms of a disease previously suffered which are both imprecisely dated as well as imprecisely observed.
Factual uncertainty (imprecision of the measurement itself) and temporal uncertainty (imprecision with respect to the time of measurement) are different kinds of uncertainty.
Whereas factual uncertainty is about evidence available for some proposition, tem-  128  poral uncertainty is about its occurrence in time.
To exemplify this consider that someone may have had symptoms typical for a certain disease, while the time of occurrence of those symptoms does not support the hypothesized disease.
This does not make the observed symptoms less true.
Temporal and factual uncertainty are not the same!
Indeed, the observed symptoms may support the hypothesis of another decease for which the timing is more appropriate.
From the above examples it is clear that it is desirable to know t o what extend a proposition is uncertain as a result of factual uncertainty and t o what extend temporal uncertainty is involved.
In other words, it is desirable t o represent factual and temporal uncertainty explicitly.
In our opinion it is thus not sufficient for a temporal reasoning system to add time as another proposition to a system in the way 'color()' or 'size()' might be added.
On the contrary, when reasoning with time all propositions defined in a system should become timedependent.
Thus a proposition like 'color(house)' becomes something like 'color(house at time t ~ ) ' .All propositions are then placed in time.
Therefore our objective is to represent uncertainty about time and facts independently and t o relate these uncertainties by means of a relation similar t o formal temporal reasoning connectives like HOLDS and OCCUR.
Uncertain temporal information and uncertain facts thus connected will be called time-objects.
Furthermore this representation should support the definition of uncertain temporal relations (like 'somewhat after/before') and inferencing with uncertain facts.
In literature most approaches which address uncertainty in temporal reasoning start either from the perspective of formal temporal theories or from fuzzy logic.
Examples of the former are the first-order probability logics by Goodwin[S], Haddawy[lO], Hanks and McDermott [ll],and Kanazawa[ 121.
Examples of fuzzy logic approaches are by Dubois and Prade[G, 71, Dutta[8] and Qian[l4].
Although uncertainty plays a different role in each of these examples two common approaches can be distinguished.
The first approach considers propositions which may be uncertain, while the time related t o those propositions is not.
That is, time serves only as an index t o the probability of propositions.
Hanks and McDermott, for example, represent the probability of a proposition 4 at a timet as P ( 4 at t ) or P(q&).
Work by Haddawy[lO] is also of this nature.
The other approach is to represent (crisp) propositions 4 which may occur at an uncertain time t+.
We might say that in these approaches the probability P(t+ at t ) is represented.
This representation is for  129  example used by [7], [8] and 1151.
Somewhat at odds with these approaches is the work by Dean and Kanazawa[5] who represent events as being certain but occurring at an uncertain time, while the truth of a fact is represented as being itself uncertain at a certain time t .
It is thus a mix of the aforementioned approaches.
Obviously, choosing either representation P ( 4 at t ) or P(t4 at t ) introduces some limitations with respect to both the reasoning process and to the kind of knowledge that can be represented.
When no uncertainty in time is allowed typical imprecise temporal relations like 'somewhat before' or 'somewhat after' cannot be represented .
Similar arguments apply when facts are represented t o occur with certainty at some not precisely known time.
Extending either representation t o allow uncertainty of the other kind is also not easily done, since this will usually cause mixing of temporal and factual uncertainty.
This is highly undesirable, because it becomes unclear to what extend the uncertainty about a proposition derives from temporal or factual uncertainty.
Limiting ourselves t o either representation also has a strong impact on the reasoning process.
The main effort when reasoning about uncertain time is usually in constraining temporal relations between facts and events.
The aim is then to arrive at a consistent set of temporal relations.
Most approaches dealing with uncertain time are thus based on temporal networks or graphs.
Work by Console et a1.
[3, 41, Chen[2], and Kirillov[l3] is of this nature.
On the other hand reasoning about uncertain propositions can usually not be embedded in temporal networks due t o its open-ended future.
In that case reasoning often involves branching futures and possible world scenarios.
Haddawy[lO] and Hanks and McDermott[ll] provide examples of this type of reasoning.
Summarizing, temporal representations in literature do not explicitly represent both temporal and factual uncertainty.
Additionally simultaneously reasoning with both uncertain facts and uncertain time has also not been dealt with.
Further, present temporal representations are not easily extended such that uncertainty about time and fact may still be distinguished.
In addition, the temporal representation chosen also restricts reasoning t o certain modes of inference.
In this paper we represent uncertain time and uncertain facts with fuzzy time-objects to overcome the above problems and limitations.
In time-objects uncertainty about time and fact are independently represented.
All propositions in our system are time-objects and thus every proposition has both a factual and a  temporal component.
Further reasoning with timeobjects is not restricted by the representation and uncertainty about fact and time can be inferred independently as we will show in the next sections.
3  derived from the time-object, or is the time-object itself constructed from uncertain time and fact, or is their possibly some other relation?
In our representation the relation between time, fact and time-object is defined with the notion of separability.
A time-object is called separable if uncertainty about time and fact are mutually independent.
In that case time and fact can be derived from the time-object and vice versa.
If a time-object is separable either the time-object or the independent time and fact representations are sufficient t o represent all knowledge.
This notion is formalized below in eqs.
(l),(3) and (4).
Only (semi-) separable time-objects are considered in the remainder of this paper.
This choice allows decomposition of reasoning with time-objects in a factfact and time-time relation as will be explained in section 6.
Obviously there are many time-objects thinkable which are not separable.
A subset of those, which will be considered in the next section, are semzseparable.
Semi-separability means that the correct 2-dimensional representations can be derived from the time-object, but not the other way around.
Under the assumption of separability the fuzzy valuation ,utobjj of the time-object tobjf can be constructed from the fuzzy valuations of a fact fz and the related corresponding fuzzy valuation of its temporal occurrence ft. Separability is partially defined by eq.
(1):  Representing time-objects  From the previous section it follows that current (2dimensional) representations do not allow for the representation of both uncertain facts and uncertain times without also allowing the mixing of uncertainty about time and fact.
Instead we propose a 3-dimensional representation called a tzme-object to evade such problems.
Time-objects are represented as objects in a space spanned by the time axis, the uncertainty axis and the axis along which facts are represented.
The timeobject is thus a 2-dimensional fuzzy set in which both time and fact are connected (the third dimension is the possibility attached).
In figure 1 an example is given of such a time-object.
where TOV denotes the time-object valuation which needs t o be defined.
We define TOV as:  timeobject  Motivation for this definition of TOV is that it reflects the mutual independence, and thus the separability of the time-object.
Eq.
(2) may be interpreted as a fuzzy analogy to the probability P ( f z ,fi).
Because of the assumed separability of the timeobject the sets of valuations of fz and fi can be constructed in case tobjf is given.
That is, under the condition that max(ptobjj(x,t)) = 1 or, stated otherwise, that the core of Ptobj, is not empty.
Time-objects which satisfy this condition are called n o r m a l timeobjects.
As a consequence the derived fuzzy sets pjl and P I t will aIso be normal.
In case of normal separable time-objects the valuations of fZ and ft are retrieved from t o b j f in the following way:  Figure 1: A n example o f  a separable time-object represented as a 3-dimensional object combining uncertain t i m e and uncertain fact.
A time-object should be interpreted as a fuzzy valuation serving the same purpose as connectives like 'OCCURS' and 'HOLDS' in formal temporal logics, with the exception that time-objects have a truth range between 0 and 1, while in formal logics a timeobject is either true (1) or false (0).
Fuzzy logic thereby allows for a large number of possible definitions of the fuzzy valuation function.
It is important in this place t o reflect on the nature of the relation between the time-object and 2dimensional representations of uncertainty about time and fact.
Can these 2-dimensional representations be  130  Ir  fa  ime timeobject  Figure 2: Constraining t h e domain of a separable time-object  4  These equations represent the inverse relations of eq.
(1).
A time-object is now called separable when eq.
(l)!
(3) and (4) are valid which formalizes the definition of separability.
The above conditions for separability are not satisfied when the time-object is not normal.
To retain separability for non-normal time-objects eqs.
(3) and (4) need to be generalized.
Given the choice for TOV in eq.
(2) this can be done in the following way:  Constraining time-objects  There is an undeniable relation between the temporal and factual parts of a time-object.
However, temporal uncertainty should not become inextricably mixed with factual uncertainty at any other place than in the time-object.
On the other hand we do want t o include some kind of influence between time and fact t o do justice at least t o our intuition.
This section deals with a solution which allows for such an influence without the mixing of uncertainties.
The solution we present is t o restrict the influence between time and fact t o their respective domains by constraining the domain of the time-object itself.
Figure 2 shows a rather simple way t o constrain the domain of a time-object.
In this case the range of possible time points which correspond t o the smallest possible instantiation E, of the fact fz is constrained as well as the range of time corresponding to the largest instantiation 2, of fc.
Similarly the range of fact instantiations corresponding t o the earliest time point instantiation t, of ft is constrained, as also those fact instantiations corresponding t o t, .
These constraints are summarized in eq.
(8) and shown graphically in figure 2.
Note that eqs.
(5) and (6) involve a circular argument.
To break the circularity prior knowledge of max(pft ( t ) )and max(pf, (2))is needed.
In addition t o separability time-objects should also be convex.
Convexity is defined as:  Convexity guarantees that the more or less possible values for tobj(z,t ) are clustered together.
Obviously, if the time-object is convex, the projections to the time and fact axis are also convex.
When reasoning with time-objects in the next sections it is assumed that all time-objects are convex.
Further, if time-objects are not normal, it is assumed that additional knowledge is available such that separability may still be claimed.
The notion of separability itself is allowed t o be relaxed somewhat as we will see in the next section.
In eq.
(8) t l l t 2 , 21 and 2 2 are the constraints applied to the domain of the time-object.
In general constraints applied t o the domain of the time-object may take any form.
Some restrictions apply, however.
For one, if all possible instantiations of time and fact are to be covered by the time-object (complete specification).
131  In addition, in order to retain perfect reconstruction of the set of possible temporal and factual instantiations from a given normal time-object using eqs.
(3) and (4) the following restrictions apply: 0  A time-object is called semi-separable if it satisfies the above conditions provided the unconstrained timeobject is separable as well.
Temporal and factual parts can be retrieved from the constrained time-object, but not the other way around.
Although the above equations apply to normal time-objects, definitions can easily be generalized to include also non-normal timeobjects.
The effect of constraining time-objects is shown in the next section where the process of instantiating a time-objects is considered.
5  Figure 3: Instantiation and f a c t u a l a n d temporal project i o n s of a semi-separable time-object.
Instantiating time-objects  Suppose evidence for fz and ft is obtained, denoted The instantiated semiby respectively f: and separable time-object, called tobj;, is then defined to be the fuzzy intersection of tobjf and tobji:  fi.
tobj; = tobjf  n tobji  We have introduced notations f:, f:', f; and ':f to show the reader the difference between separable and semi-separable time-objects.
In case tobjf is separable temporal and factual projections of instantiations of tobjf equal :f and fl'.
In case of semi-separable timeobjects, these instantiations can be further constrained t o :f and as will be shown below.
The difference between (f:, and (f:', expresses the mutual influence time and fact can have on their respective domains.
Suppose we start with a time-object which is separable.
Then instantiations of the time-object can directly be calculated from the temporal and factual projections in the following way: First, calculate the instantiations f .
and as those fuzzy subsets which are maximal compatible with fz and ft given the evidence f: and fl.
As for the timeobjects, also for these fuzzy-sets the fuzzy intersection is taken t o represent this notion (see also figure 3):  (10)  where tobji is an unconstrained separable time-object calculated from f: and according to eq.
(2).
This is, by the way, an instant where f: and f; become available in the process of reasoning and not tobj; directly.
We noted earlier that this is the common thing t o expect.
There are many functions possible to define fuzzy intersection (so called T-norms).
These should, however, relate to the way time-objects are defined.
Given our definition of TOV in eq.
(2) the appropriate T-norm t o choose is the maximal T-norm which is defined as:  fl  Pt0bjf"tObj,(2,  fl"  fl')  fl")  fi'  t ) = min(Ptobj,(z, t ) ,P t o b j , ( Z , t ) ) (11) x,t  where p t o b j ( z ,t ) represents the fuzzy valuation of the time-object tobj at the point ( z i t ) in the fact-time space.
Given (semi-) separability of tobjf and tobji, the factual and temporal instantiations fl" and are calculated below under the condition of normality:  f:=  n f; fl' = ft n fl  ft'  (14) (15)  fx  The instantiated time-object can now be calculated directly as: P t o b j i ( 2 ,t>= TOv(f:(z),  fl'(t))= f:(4  x  fl'(t>  (16) If the instantiated time-object is normal and separable no further constraints apply and f:' = : f and fl" = fl'.
If the instantiated time-object is not normal it is  132  fr  fl"  needed t o keep the maximum values of and in memory to retain separability.
If the time-object tobjf is only semi-separable, the situation becomes slightly more difficult as can be seen from figure 3.
In that case f : and fl' can be further constrained on there domains to f': and fl" respectively.
The constrained domains of and and fp, denoted [zs, z e ]and [is,t e ] are , calculated as follows:  3-dimensional time-object tobjj and the 3-dimensional time-object tobj,.
The main difference between the subspaces in which tobjf and tobj, reside is in the dimensions where the factual parts of the time-objects involved are represented (fz and g y ) .
We perceive the relation between tobjf and tobj, as represented graphically in figure 4.
Figure 4 shows the decomposition of the inference relation between tobjj and tobj, into two separate relations R(f,,gy) and Rt(ft,gt).
In this figure the relation is mapped t o three dimensions by omitting the uncertainty axis and mapping the temporal content of tobjf and tobj, onto the same axis.
The relation R ( f z ,gy) denotes the fact-fact relation between the factual parts and R t ( f t ,gt) denotes the time-time relation between the temporal parts of tobjf and tobj,.
fl  t s = {min(t) I Ptobj;(x,t)  > 0) t e = {max(t) I ptobj;(x,t) > 0) x s = {min(x> I Ptobj;(x,t) > 0)  (17)  xe = {max(x) I P t o b j ; ( z , t )  (20)  Now the fuzzy valuation off: as :  > 0)  (18)  (19)  and f;" are calculated  The instantiated time-object tobj' and its compatible instantiations 2'" and t"' have now been calculated the other way around.
Note that these instantiations are equal to those already directly inferred with eqs.
(12) and (13) above.
Whether and f; are inferred from tobji or the other way around depends on how these instantiations become available to the reasoning process, but is of no consequence as long as tobji is separable and normal.
Otherwise, if tobji is not normal, the maximum possibilities of the projections of tobji along the time and fact axis need t o be known in addition.
In this section we have shown how time and fact can have mutual influence on their respective domains without inextricable mixing of uncertainties.
In the next section it will be shown that this influence is also carried over t o the reasoning process.
fl  6  Figure 4: T h e decomposed fuzzy inference relation between two separable time-objects.
Such a decomposition of the inference relation is only allowed in case the time-objects involved are semiseparable.
This is exactly the reason why we consider only semi-separable time-objects.
But why would we like t o decompose the inference relation at all?
Suppose the inference relation is not decomposed and a semi-separable time-object tobj; is directly inferred from a semi-separable time-object tobj; with an ordinary fuzzy inference relation R:  Reasoning with time-objects  = maxz,tl minz,tl,y,tz(~tobj;(x, t l ) ,R ( z ,t l , ~  Ptobj$%  The question addressed in this section is how to infer one time-object from another.
As already noted before there are technical reasons for considering only semi-separable time-objects.
Below we will discuss these reasons starting from the following single inference step:  (23)  t2)  , t 2 ) )  where R is a standard fuzzy implication function like Mamdani's or Larsen's.
In that case any instantiations and derived in the manner explained in the previous sections would leave tobj, unaltered in case m a x ( t o b j ; ( z , t ) ) = 1.
This means that a variety of temporal instantiations fl" would result in the same conclusion tobjg as long as would be a normal fuzzy set.
In addition, instantiations would directly influence the valuation  fl'  IF t o j b j ( z , t l ) THEN tojb,(y,tz)  fi"  The relation between two time-objects in a fuzzy inference scheme is a 5-dimensional relation between the  133  fr  fy  of g : , which would result in an undesired mixing of uncertainties in g;.
Another (pragmatic) reason for the inference decomposition is that 5-dimensional relations are generally unintelligible to humans and thus hard t o obtain from knowledge acquisition.
Further such direct relations do not reveal the temporal relations between two timeobjects, nor the fact-fact implications.
Except for evading problems with knowledge acquisition and uncertainty mixing an additional technical advantage of the proposed decomposition is that typical time relations like 'before', 'after' and 'persist' can now be performed in their proper domain.
Similarly advantage can be taken of the large variety of fuzzy inferencing techniques t o relate the factual parts of time-objects.
6.1  The fact-fact relation  The fact-fact relation R(f,, g,) is a general modusponens inference rule:  if  2  is f,  in the temporal domain are closely related to intuitions about time, which, when condensed in relations, constitute a structure of time.
In such a time-structure usually the ontology, ordering, flow, and density of time are defined.
We discussed the ordering of fuzzy primitive timeelements in [l].
Other possible relations in the temporal domain are temporal statements like "approximately at the same time", or " t , minutes after" and the notion of persistency.
Dubois and Prade suggest in [7] also relations like "much after", "before or slightly after", "much before".
For lack of space we will below only describe the relation "t, minutes after" t o provide the reader with the general idea.
The relation " t , minutes after" is defined as an algebraic operation with fuzzy numbers.
Fuzzy numbers denote fuzzy sets whose membership functions are continuous and convex and have a non-empty core.
Suppose g{ is the fuzzy set which is "t, minutes after" Then gi is calculated with following relation, based on the extension principle:  fr.
then y is g,  x is f , Y is  where pt, represents the fuzzy valuation of the notion " t , minutes".
Eq.
(26) is a standard fuzzy algebraic operation.
s:  where the if-then statements are represented as fuzzy implications.
Suppose fz is defined on X and f y is defined on Y .
The fuzzy implication R(f, , g, ) is then a fuzzy relation defined on X x Y of the following general form: pR(f,,gy)(2,  y) = I(pfz(z),p g y ( Y > >  6.3  Given that g$ is derived with eq.
(25) and g{ with, for example, eq.
(26), the conclusion of the inference process can be calculated.
The conclusion tobjS, will be the instantiation of tobj, with gh and g: which will themselves be constrained to g;' and gy' in the manner explained in section 4.
This concludes the inference process.
Note that if time-objects are constrained on their domains, fz has an indirect influence on gt through f t , but also through f y and tobj,.
Similarly f t has indirect influence on g,.
The influence does not affect the valuations and is restricted t o the domains.
This is what we meant earlier: the mutual influence between fact and time in semi-separable time-objects carries over t o the inference process.
N o t e also that another consequence of the inference process is that the maximum possibility of the inferred time-object tobji is bounded by the maximum possibilities of and which in turn are bound by tobj; :  (24)  where l ( p f s ( z ) pSy(y)) , is an implication function, like, for example, Mamdani's or Larsen's implication function.
The implication of gb, given f;, is now calculated according t o the following general scheme: pgb(Y> = m$x~~~(pf~'(2), pR(f,,g,)(2, Y))  6.2  Inference results  (25)  The time-time relation  The time-time relation Rt between f t and gt actually stands for a number of relations which are a special class of the general fact-fact relations discussed above.
Where fact-fact relations are relating a domain X t o a domain Y ( R : X --+ Y ) ,time-time relations are defined in the temporal domain T only and of the form Rt : T --+ T .
The temporal domain T is thereby independent from X and Y .
Temporal reasoning is different from ordinary reasoning in the sense that special relations apply to the common temporal part of all time-objects.
Relations  fz fr  In practice this means that the inferred time-object is never more possible than its causing time-object, which is according to intuition.
134  7 Conclusions  [IO] P. Haddawy.
Believing Change and Changing Belief.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 26(3):385-409, may 1996.
We have presented a new approach t o temporal reasoning with uncertainty which incorporates reasoning with both uncertain time and uncertain facts.
It is shown that approaches in literature dealing with either uncertain time or uncertain facts can not be extended t o include uncertainty of the other kind without also mixing temporal and factual uncertainty.
Therefore we propose to use 3-dimensional time-objects t o represent uncertainty about time and facts.
The timeobjects considered in this paper are semi-separable such that decomposition in factual and temporal parts is possible.
A new method is proposed which constrains the domain of a time-object.
Constraining the domain of a time-object introduces a relation between the time and fact components of a time-object, but avoids mixing of uncertainty about time and fact.
A method for reasoning with time-objects is presented and it is shown how one time-object may be inferred from another time-object by decomposition of the inference relation under the assumption of (semi-) separability.
[Ill S. Hanks and D. McDermott.
Modeling a dynamic and uncertain world I: symbolic and probabilistic reasoning about change.
Artificial Intelligence, (66):l-55, 1994.
[12] K. Kanazawa.
Reasoning about Time a n d Probability.
PhD thesis, Brown University, Department of Computer Science, Providence, Rhode Island 09912, USA, 1992.
[13] V.P.
Kirillov.
Constructive stochastic temporal reasoning in situation assessment.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man a n d Cybernetics, 24(8):1099-1113, august 1994.
[14] D.Q.
Qian.
Representation and use of imprecise temporal knowledge in dynamic systems.
Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 50:59-77, 1992, [15] S.M.
Yuen and K.P.
Lam.
Modeling temporal uncertainty in microprocessor systems.
pages 26-31.
3th ISUMA-NAFIPS conference, 1995.
References E.G.P.
Bovenkamp and J.C.A.
van der Lubbe.
Towards a Fuzzy Time Structure for Temporal Reasoning with Uncertainty.
volume I, pages 558-562, Aachen Germany, September 2-5 1996.
EUFIT-96, Verlag Mainz.
Z. Chen.
Fuzzy temporal reasoning for process supervision.
Expert Systems, 12(2):123-137, may 1995.
L. Console.
On the co-operation between abductive and temporal reasoning in medical diagnosis.
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, (3):291-311, 1991.
L. Console, A.J.
Rivolin, and P. Torasso.
Fuzzy temporal reasoning on causal modals.
International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 6:107-133, 1991.
T. Dean and K. Kanazawa.
Persistence and Probabilistic Projection.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, a n d Cybernetics, 19(3):574-585, may-june 1989.
D. Dubois, J. Lang, and H. Prade.
Timed possibilistic logic.
Fvndementa Informaticae, 15(3-4):211-234, 1991.
D. Dubois and H. Prade.
Processing fuzzy temporal knowledge.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, a n d Cybernetics, 19(4):729-744, august 1989.
S. Dutta.
An event based fuzzy temporal logic.
pages 64-71.
18th International Symposium on Multiplevalued Logic, 1988.
S.D.
Goodwin, E. Neufeld, and A. Trudel.
Probabilistic temporal representation and reasoning.
International Journal of Expert Systems, 7(3):261-288, 1994.
135