A Theory of Time and Temporal Incidence based on Instants and Periods* Lluis Vila+  Eddie Schwalb  Information and Computer Science Dept.
University of California, Irvine Abstract Time is fundamental in representing and reasoning about changing domains.
A proper temporal representation requires characterizing two notions: (1) time itself, and (2) temporal incidence, i.e.
the domainindependent properties for the truth-value of Juents and events throughout time.
There are some problematic issues such as the expression of instantaneous events and instantaneous holding of fluents, the specification of the properties for the temporal holding of Juents and the Dividing Instant Problem.
This paper presents a theory of tame and temporal incidence which is more natural than its predecessors and satisfactorily addresses the issues above.
Our theo y of time, called Z P , is based on having instants and periods at equal level.
We define a theory of temporal incidence upon at whose main original feature is the distinction between continuous and discrete fluents.
1  time.
Commonly there is a distinction between propositions describing the state of the world (fluents) and those describing the occurrences that make the world change (events).
For these frameworks, that claim to have a wide range of practical applicationsin AI, an appropriate and precise theory of time is a fundamental component.
To enjoy a proper temporal representation, two notions need to be defined: 1. time itself, and 2. temporal incidence, i.e.
the domain-independent properties for the truth-value of fluents and events throughout time.
The aim of this paper is to provide a natural theory of time and temporal incidence that supports the formalization of changing domains where discrete and continuous phenomena occur.
There are a number of problematic issues that have been encountered by previous attempts.
Namely, the expression of instantaneous events and instantaneous holding of jluents, the specification of the properties for the temporal holding of fluents and the Dividing Instant Problem.
This paper presents a theory of time and temporal incidence which can be used as a formal ground t o model changing domains.
Our theory of time is based on both instants and periods2 together at equal level.
We call it Z'P.
We define a theory of temporal incidence upon 2P.
Its major original feature is the distinction between continuous and discrete fluents.
Although the difference between them is something commonly agreed, there is no previous attempt were the specific features where they differ and its close relation with the theory of time have been accounted properly.
It is a simple idea yet combined with the instant/period ontology turns out to be sufficient to satisfactorily address the problems encountered by previous approaches.
Section 2 presents some problematic issues to be considered.
Section 3 discusses the shortcomings of previous approaches.
Section 4 presents ZP.
Section 5 presents our categorization of propositions and the theory of their temporal incidence.
In section 6 we discuss how the above problems are satisfactorily addressed and section 7 presents an example where the  Introduction  In order for an intelligent system to interact with the real world it needs to be able to reason about the changes that happen in it and the events and actions that originate them.
Consider, as an illustrative example, the so-called hybrid systems [lo].
These are systems that involve both discrete and continuous change.
For instance many electro-mechanical devices exhibit both continuous (e.g.
the charge in a battery) and discrete behavior (e.g.
a digital signal), and involve events that can be viewed as instantaneous (e.g.
to close a relay) and others that take time (e.g.
recharge the battery)'.
The notion of Time has been recognized as a fundamental in formalizing change and action.
Many theories for change and action are built upon a theory of time [17, 1, 14, 25, 20, 15, 4, 6, 7, 19, 13, 241.
In these systems, the domain at hand is formalized by expressing how propositions are true or false throughout *Contact address: Lluis Vila, 444 CS UCI, Irvine CA 92717; vila@ics.uci.edu;http://www.ics.uci/ vila tPartially supported by a MEC of Spain grant (EX94 77909683).
'Hybrid systems are interesting because m a n y real systems can be modeled as such.
2By period we merely mean a time interval.
21 0-8186-7528/96 $5.00 0 1996 IEEE  Non-atomic fluents.
In some cases, axiomatizing the holding of non-atomic fluents such as negation, conjunction or disjunction of atomic fluents may not be straight forward [20, 71.  behavior a hybrid model is described using our approach.
Finally section 8 summarizes our contribution.
Problematic Issues  2  Dividing Instant Problem (DIP).
Assuming that time is made of instants and periods, we need to determine the truth-value of a fluent f (e.g.
"the light is on") at an instant i, given that f is true on a period p 1 ending at i and it is false at a period p2 beginning at it (see figure 2) [8, 21, 1, 71.
Instantaneous events.
There are many events like "turn off the light", "shoot the gun", "start moving" which intuitively are viewed as instantaneous.
Modeling them can be controversial since null duration time elements seem to be needed to talk about them.
Moreover, some problems arise when we need to model complex sequences of them occurring in presence of continuous change (we discuss it in detail in section 7).
propositions  -ff  Instantaneous fluent holding.
Modeling continuous change, i.e.
taking account of fluents whose value is continuously changing, involves representing parameters whose value may hold for only a single instant.
A simple, representative example is the parameter "speed" of a ball tossed upwards in what we call it the Tossed Ball Scenarzo (TBS) (see figure 1).
,  p; f?
P2  I I  i  e  time  Figure 2: The Dividing Instant Problem (DIP).
If we want to be logically consistent the problem arises.
If intervals are closed then f and lf are both true at i .
If they are open we might have a "truth gap" at i .
The other two options are open/closed and closed/open intervals.
An arbitrary decision here is artificial.
Take, for instance, the fluent "being in contact with the floor".
It seems that p1 is closed/open interval whereas p 2 is open/closed.
I Figure 1: The Tossed Ball Scenario (TBS).
3  There must be an instant where the speed of the ball is zero, being not zero for a period before and a period after it.
To model it we require the ability of talking about the holding of fluents at instants.
However, it may lead to the dividing instant problem below.
In this section we briefly summarize the main criticisms to previous approaches in terms of the issues above.
Instant-based approaches [17, 20, 41 They have been criticized for not being natural ("our direct experience is with phenomena that take time"), for being 121 and for getting in trouble with  Non-instantaneous fluent holding.
Some difficulties arise when defining the properties of temporal incidence for non-instantaneous fluents such as the following:  Allen's interval-based approach [l]  Homogeneity: If a fluent is true on a piece of time it must hold on any subtime [l,71.
e  Related Work  Neither instantaneous holding of fluents nor instantaneous events can be represented, the reason being that there are no instants.
Concatenativity3: If a fluent is true on two consecutive pieces of time it must be true on the piece of time obtained by concatenating them.
Notice that there may be different views for the meaning of "consecutive" .
Characterizing holding of continuously changing fluents exhibits semantical problems.
Specificly, the axiom for "homogeneity of fluent holding" (axiom H.2) and the axiom for "holding of negated fluents" (axiom H.4) do conflict.
This and the previous problem are precisely presented in [7].
3Thisproperty, in addition to being a semantic issue, may be important for computational efficiency since it allows to have a compact representation of fluents holding throughout numerous consecutive or overlaping periods.
22  4  Allen and Hayes [2] They propose a theory of intervals but they suggest various ways of deriving instants from them.
One type is defined as nests of intervals.
These "instants", however, are only used for instantaneous events but not for fluents.
They write ([4,section 4) ".
.
.resolutely refusing to allow fluents to hold at points.
One could define a notion of a fluent X being true at a point p by saying that X is true at p just when there is some interval I containing p during which X is true".
This is again not satisfactory for modeling continuous fluents (consider the ('zero speed" fluent in the TBS).
The other type, called moment, is defined as an indivisible period.
This is not adequate either because, although very short, it takes some time.
In the TBS, for example, we cannot use a moment to talk about the time where the ball speed is zero because then the periods p l and p2 would not meet.
This would entail that the ball is hovering in the air for a while.
The technique of change of granularity[9] applied to fix this shortcoming is problematic too since it leads to unintuitive and non-uniform models of time and introduces unnecessary technical complications [22].
Time  In this section we present our theory of time, called  ZP, based on the idea of having instants and periods  at equal We are lead by the intuition that a period is characterized by its two endpoints.
Our language for time has two sorts of symbols, the instants sort (2) and the periods sort ( P ) , which are formed by two infinite disjoint sets of symbols, and three primitive binary relation symbols, 4 :Z x Z and begin, end : z x p .
The first-order logical formulation of ZP consists of the following axioms: '(i 4 i) i 4 i' -(it 4 i)  *  i 4 it A it 4 i" + i 4 i" i 4 i' V i 3 i' V i = i' 3i' (i' 4 i) 3i' (i 4 i')  +  begin(i,p) A end(i',p) i 4 i' 3 i begin(i, p) 3i end(i,p) begin(i,p) A begin(i',p) i = i' end(i,p) A end(i',p) j 2 = i' i 4 i' 3 p (begin(i,p) A end(i',p)) begin(i,p) A end(i',p) A A begin(i,p') A end(i',p') =+-p = p'  *  Galton's instant-period theory [7] Galton's approach presents two central characteristics: 1.
It is based on a time ontology with instants and periods on the same footang.
The theory of time is not based on the classical set-theoretic interval constructions in order to avoid the DIP.
IPltIP4are the conditions for 4 to be an strict linear order -namely irreflexive, asymmetric, transitive and linear- relation over the instants6 IPS imposes unboundness on this ordered set.
IP6 is intended to order the extremes of a period.
This axiom rules out durationless periods which are not necessary since we have instants as a primitive.
Thus an instant cannot be identified as a null duration period.
The pairs of axioms IP7.- and IPS.- formalize the intuition that the beginning and ending instants of a period always exist and are unique respectively.
Conversely, axioms IPS and 1 9 0 are intended to ensure the existence and uniqueness of periods t o close the connection between instants and periods.
We now characterize the models by following the simple intuition of an interval being an ordered pair.
2.
It diversifies fluents into instantaneous/durable and states of positionlstates of motion: a state of position can hold at isolated instants; if it holds during a period it holds at its limits (e.g.
"a quantity taking a particular value"); a state of motion cannot hold at isolated instants (e.g.
"a body's being at rest").
The main shortcomings of this approach are the following:  1.
The theory formed by the axioms is too weak for a proper account of the relations between instants and periods.
We discuss it in detail in section 4.
2.
It's not clear that Galton's new types of fluents are useful.
Let us try to formalize the TBS: we consider the fluent speed # 0; if we model it as a state of position then we get in trouble; speed J.
0 holds on p1 and p z which must contain the limiting instants including i where speed= 0; If we consider it an state of motion then we are not allowed to say that lspeed # 0 is true at the isolated instant i.
Definition 1 (ZP-structure) A n ZP-structure 2s a tuple Zd, P d , <d, begind,endd) where Z d and P d are sets o instants and periods respectively, <d is a binary relation on Zd and begind,endd are binary relations On z d , P d .
/  3.
While states of position are concatenable states  We merely view periods as ordered pairs of instants.
We show that the elements and the pairs of an unbounded linear order S form a model for ZP.
of motion are not always.
It looks somewhat counter-intuitive: it seems that states of position should not be concatenable since the quantity they represent may have a different value at the meeting point.
Since it is not the case for states of motion it seems that they should be concatenable.
In section 5 we shall follow this intuition.
4Very much with in the same spirit of [7] and [5].
5Results on Z?
'are a summary of those presented in [22, 231.
'Notice that I 4 is actually redundant since it can be derived from IPz.
We include it for clarity.
23  The reason of this weakness is the too loose connection between instants and periods.
It can be properly extended to fit the idea of having an instant at the meeting points [22].
The resulting theory is equivalent to ZPdense.
Theorem 1 (a model) Given an infinite set S and an unbounded strict Iinear order < on it then the ZPstructure ( S ,pairs(S),<,Jirst, second) forms a model of Z P .
Corollary 1 Every model of T P is characterized b y an injinite set S and a nunbounded strict Iinear order < on it.
In this section we present a theory of the ascription of fluents and occurrences in time.
The key issue to consider is the temporal incidence of a fluent at the extremes of a period.
Our approach is based on the following ideas:  The subtheory of dense models, we call it ZPdenSe, is axiomatized by adding the following density axiom: IPll  i 4 i'  j 3i"  (i 4 i" 4 i')  1.
We allow fluents to hold at poznts.
We demonstrate that this does not, in fact, create any problem.
Corollary 2 (dense models) The models of ZPdenseare characterized b y the set of elements and the set of ordered pairs of distinct elements of an unbounded, "dense", strict linearly ordered set.
Hence ZPdepzseisan axiomatization of T h ( ( I N T ( Q )Q , )).
2.
We dzstznguish between contznuous and discrete jluents.
We diversify fluents according to whether the change on the parameter they model is continuous or dzscrete.
Let us see how our theory relates to previous ones.
The original Allen and Hayes's theory (let us call it I A N ) [a] is exclusively based on intervals.
For the sake of comparison, we can introduce instants using the following technique used by Ladkin [16]: we take pairs of intervals one meeting the other, apply the equivalence relation "having the same meeting point" and associate a instant to each class Let us call this extension TAX,,  Temporal Incidence  5  Remark 1 Z P accepts both dense and discrete models of time.
We use a standard reified temporal first-order language with equality (as in [17, 1, 71).
The decisions made regarding temporal representation are the following: e  Time theory: We take ZP.
We define the instant-to-period (such as within) and period-toperiod (such as Meets) relations upon 5 , begin and end for convenience.
e  Reified propositions: We use standard firstorder language forms although we shall not deal with quantified expressions.
Propositions are classified into three classes: contanuous fluents, discrete fluents' and events.
e  Temporal Occurrence Predicates (TOPS).
We shall introduce a different TOP for each combination of temporal proposition and time unit (similar to [14, 71):  .
We obtain a theory whose class of models is the same as our instant-period axiomatization, i.e.
the theories are equivalent.
Theorem 2 2 7 E Z A ~ , , Galton proposes [7] a theory of instants and periods "on the same footing".
The axioms seem appropriate to avoid DIP-like criticisms and to specify the properties of the various types of fluents introduced.
However, the theory looks very artificial.
It is difficult to figure out the intuition that some of they intend to capture and it complicates the proofs of theorems.
A more serious criticism is the fact that the theory is too weak.
It is easy to identify examples of counterintuitive models accepted by the theory:  H o L D s ~ ~ ( ~ , ~ The ) continuous fluent f holds throughout the period p The discrete fluent f , H o L D s $ ( ~ , ~G ) holds throughout the period p The continuous fluent f H o L D s ~ ~i)( ~ , holds at the instant z WOLDS$(~, i) = The discrete fluent f holds at the instant i OccmSon(e,p)E The event e occurs on the period p Occmsat(e,2) E The event e occurs at the instant i  Example 1 Let us take a basic model M composed of an infinite set of periods and Allen's relations satisfying interval axioms plus an infinite set of instants which make M satisfy I1 -for example I N T ( Q ) as periods and Q as instants: e  Example model 1: M plus a single instant i Q which limits a certain period p in M and only that one.
In particular it does not limit a n y of those periods that meet or are met b y p .
'We use the equality relation to express a fluent representing a parameter taking a certain value.
E.g.
the speed of a ball bep ) .
We omit ing positive on p is expressed as HoLDs(speed = necessary axioms imposing the exclusivity among the different values of a parameter.
i$Q which limits a certain period p in M and as not within a n y period.
I n particular it is not within any of those periods that overlap p .
e Example model 2: M plus a single instant  +,  24  Terminology.
Henceforth we use the following Non-atomic fluents.
notational shorthands.
We may use begin and end in functional form (e.g.
i = begin@)).
H O L D S ~ ~ Negation: stands for both HOLDS, and HOLDS$ and H O L D S , ~ stands for both HOLDS" and HOLDS>.
We define within(i,p) E begin(ilat, p ) A end(i",pj i' + i 4 i" and, given p i p' such that Meets(p,p'), p" = Conjunction: Concat(p,p') begin(p'/) = begin(p) A end(p") = end(p').
We use its functional form too.
5.1 Properties of Temporal Incidence Since instants and periods are defined at the same Disjunction: primitive ontological level in ZP, we are not forced to accept any assumption on the relation between the HOLD^(^ v f',z) ++ H o L D s , ~ ( ~2), V H o r " ( f ' , holding of a fluent on a period and its holding at the period endpoints.
A fluent holds during a period if and only if it holds at the inner instants: HoLDs~~(e ~ , ~ )(within(i,p) + HOLD^(^,^)) (1)  6  Nothing can be inferred about its holding at its endpoints.
Either the fluent or its negation may hold at them.
Our opinion is that this is domain-dependent.
The fluent holding at the extreme point can go either way: (1) It can be the fluent finishin a t that point (an example is perhaps "shoot the gun'$, (2) the fluent starting at it (an example might be "start moving"), or a different fluent representing the state of changing e example here could be "turn on the light").
By keeping them independent we already avoid some of the problems in section 2 as we shall see in a moment.
2)  (5)  Revisiting the Problems  Let us now see how the problems presented in section 2 are addressed.
Instantaneous events.
Since we have instants in our ontology, we can express them straight forwardly using OCCURS,~ a t an instant.
In the DIP, for instance, we have OCCURs,l(switchoff, i).
In section 7 we discuss the issues regarding sequences of events.
Instantaneous holding.
Having instants in our ontology allows us to talk about instantaneous holding of a fluent.
The underlying view of "open intervals" (axiom 1) ensures that there will be no conflict with the holding of that fluent on meeting periods.
For discrete fluents it only can happen if it holds on a meeting period (as enforced by axiom 2).
In the case of a continuous fluent there is ncrestriction and it can be expressed using the HOLDS,~ predicate.
In the TBS, for instance, the speed of the ball is a continuous fluent and the scenario is simply expressed as:  Continuous fluents.
A continuous fluent may hold both during a period and at a particular instant without any restriction.
This is not the case for discrete ones.
Discrete fluents.
The genuine property of discrete fluents is that they cannot hold at an isolated anstant: HoLDs$(~, i ) + 3p ( H o L D s , ~ , ( ~ , ~ ) A  +,  HoLDSLn(speed = p l ) HoLDSgt(speed = 0, i) HoLDS,,(speed = -, p 2 )  (within(i,p) V begin(z,p) V end(2,p)))  (2)  Our distinction between continuous and discrete events do not fit with Galton's distinction between states of position and states of motion.
However discrete fluents correspond to Shoham's concatenable proposition types.
Identifying it as a key property in modeling changing domains is one of this paper's contributions.
end(p1) = i = begin(p2)  Non-instantaneous fluent holding.
Some of the fundamental properties of previous approaches are either theorems of our theory or they are very easy to specify.
For instance, Allen's Homogeneity H O L D S ~ ~ ( ~ , ~ )  In(p',p)  + I - I O L D S ; ~ ( ~ , P ' ) is  easy to prove.
The properties for concatenativity are as follows:  Events.
Unlike previous approaches, our proposal does not include any specific axiom governing the occurrence of events.
It corresponds to the intuition that events represent an accomplishment which may concurrently happen.
For example, one may accomplish producing a software module on the period "Jan/lstDec/3lst" and accomplish producing another module on the period "Jul/lst-Jul/3lst".
Theorem 3 (Concatenativity of discrete fluents) IfMeets(p,p') then HoLDs$(~,P) A H o L D s , ~ , ( ~ , P ' ) ++ HoLDs;(~, Concat(p, p'))  25  (6)  Theorem 4 (Concatenativity of continuous fluents) If Meets(p,p') then  Relay Solar  L+ T I  H o L D s ~ ~ ( (A~H, O ~ L) D S ; ~ ( ~ , P 'A) HoLDs,~(~, end(p) H O L D S ~ ( Concat(p,p'))) ~,  I  I  I  I  I  I  L -  (7)  Figure 3: The hybrid circuit example.
The Dividing Instant Problem.
The proposition in the DIP can be regarded as a discrete fluent.
Then the scenario is formalized as:  CO: "If the sun is shining and the relay is closed, the solar array is a source of current and the battery accumulates charge."
HoLDs$(light = on,pl) Meets(p1,pz) HOLDs$((light = off, p a )  D1: "If the relay is closed, when the signal from the controller goes high, then the relay opens."
Note that given this information only, the query HOLDS; (light = on, end(p2)) cannot be answered.
Answering it requires additional domain-dependent information.
In some cases we will like to regard period p l as closed at the end.
For instance, imagine the fluent f="being in contact with the floor" for a ball being lifted up.
At the dividing instant one probably want to have f=true.
There are other examples for which the closed period is pa.
In the light example, it might be the case that the most appropriate is viewing the fluent light as having three possible values {on, changing, off}.
We believe that this is a domain-dependent issue and our approach does not make any commitment about that.
However it provides the means to specify "safely" what happens at the dividing instant.
7  D2: "If the relay is open, when the signal from the  controller goes low, then the relay closes."
D3: "If the signal is low, when the controller detects that the charge level in the battery has reached the threshold q 2 , then the controller turns on the signal to the relay " Now, let us consider a particular envisionment or predicted qualitative behaviour.
Typically it is described as a sequence of states that hold alternatively at a point and during an interval.
When discrete events happen ".
.
.we would like to model them as being instantaneous" (Iwasaki).
The problems arise at the point where sequences of them need to be described, for instance "the signal goes high and smmedaately a f t e r the relay closes".
Given the initial state of our example where the szgnal is low, the relay is closed and the sun is shining, the intended envisionment would be the following sequence of states:  Example: Modelling Hybrid Systems  In this section we illustrate the application of our time theory by means of an example in qualitative modeling.
A (qualitative) model of a system is usually the result of an abstraction intended to simplify the analysis.
In hybrid models this abstraction produces discontinuous or discrete behaviors together with continuous ones.
There are many instances of Hybrad systems: most of electro-mechanical devices are, e.g.
photocopiers, cars, stereo sets, video cameras, etc.
There have been several attempts of introducing discrete changes into a continuous model in the area of qualitative modeling [18, 6, 11, 101.
Some semantical problems have been encountered because of the different nature of discrete changes and continuous change.
We shall see that an adequate theory of time and temporal incidence help in overcoming them.
Let's consider a particular example to illustrate these problems and how are they handled in our proposal.
The following example, the qualitative model, the intended envisionment and the tentative solutions are from [lo].
Figure 3 shows a simple circuit in which electric power is provided to a load either by a solar array or a rechargeable battery.
Its behavior is described as follows:  QBA  = 42  Q B A =?
s2.2  sa'gnuklow signakhigh signakhigh  rehy=chsed rehy=closed relay=open  The state S2.1 is produced by the signal going high and S2.2 by the relay closing.
It is not clear how to model the times of S2, S2.1 and S2.2 or the time spans and the discrete events between them.
Assuming that discrete events and changes take no time leads to logical contradiction because of their specification.
It is common for a change to take place only if the effect is not already in place.
In the case of D1, for example, the signal is low and goes high, but if the change is instantaneous both values for the signal would be true at the same time which is obviously contradictory.
The alternative is to assume that discrete changes take a very little time interval.
It is problematic too since the value of continuous variables changing concurrently becomes unknown after a sequence of actions.
In the example, the charge would keep continuously increasing for a short while.
After a number of discrete events these small variations accumulate and complicate the value computation.
26  Nevertheless, we have seen that instants are required to express instantaneous holding of fluents and instantaneous events.
We have shown that the DIP is not necessarily a problem.
0  We diversify fluents according to whether the change on the parameter they model is continuous or discrete.
We have shown that both features are required to adequately model discrete and continuous change.
The theory here presented should be of interest as a firm foundation for time to theoretical works on representation of time and to practical works on modeling changing domains.
References [l]J. Allen.
Towards a general theory of action and time.
Artzjiczal Intellzgence, 23:123-154, 1984.
S1 s2 S3  (ti, t2) tz ( t z , -)  QBA  < q2  QBA= qz QBA  < qZ  signatlow szgnak?
signathigh  [a] J.  Allen and P. Hayes.
Moments and points in an interval-based temporal logic.
Computational Intelligence, 5:225-238, 1989.  relay=closed relay=?
relay=open  [3] R. Alur, C. Courcoubetis, T. Henzinger, and P. Ho.
Hybrid automata: an algorithmic approach to the specification and analysis of hybrid systems.
In Proc.
Workshop on Theory of Hybrid Systems, pages 209-229, 1993.
[4] F. Bacchus, J .
Tenenberg, and J. Koomen.
A non-reified temporal logic.
In Proc.
KR'89, pages 2-10, 1989.
[5] A. Bochman.
Concerted instant-interval tempoOCCuRs,t(open( relay)),end(p3))  end(p2) = end(p3)  HOLDS;( relag, = open, p5)  Meets(p3,p5)  ral semantics i: Temporal ontologies.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 31(3):403-414, 1990.
[6] K. Forbus.
Introducing actions into qualitative simulation.
In Proc.
IJCA1'89, pages 1273-1278, 1989.
The behavior the system in our example can also be formalized using our theory and this modelling method.
The rules are given in appendix A.
[7] A. Galton.
A critical examination of Allen's theory of action and time.
Artificrad Intelligence, 42:159-188, 1990.
Conclusion  8  [8] C. Hamblin.
Instants and intervals.
In J. Fraser, editor, The Study of Time, pages 325-331.
Springer-Verlag , 1972.
We discussed some problematic issues that arise in temporal representations of changing domains.
Namely, the expression of znstantaneous events and instantaneous holdzng of fluents, the specification of the properties for the temporal holding of fluents and the Divading Instant Problem.
We presented a simple theory of time and temporal incidence that satisfactorily overcomes the problems encountered by previous approaches.
Its main features are: 0  [9] J. Hobbs.
Granularity.
In Proc.
IJCA1'85, 1985.
[lo] Y. Iwasaki, A. Farquhar, V. Saraswat, D. Bobrow, and V. Gupta.
Modeling time in hybrid ssytems: How fast is 'instantaneous'?
In Proc.
IJCAI'S5, 1995.
[ll]Y. Iwasaki and C. Low.
Device modeling environment: An integrated model-formulation and simulation environment for continuous and discrete phenomena.
In Proc.
of Conf.
on Intellagent Systems Engzneerzng, 1992.
The time ontology is composed of both instants and periods, where a period is merely interpreted as an ordered pair of points.
Having instants is said to cause semantical problems due to the DIP.
27  A  H. Kamp.
Events, instants and temporal reference.
In R. Bauerle, U. Egli, and A. von Stechow, editors, Semantics from Diflerent Points of View, pages 376-417.
Springer-Verlag, 1979.
M. Koubarakis.
Foundations of Temporal Constraint Databases.
PhD thesis, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 1994.
Rules formalizing the Behavior of the Circuit Example D1  D2  R. Kowalski and M. Sergot.
A logic-based calculus of events.
New Generation Computing, 3, 1986.
D3  B. Kuipers.
Qualitative simulation using timescaled abstraction.
Artificial Intelligence an Engineering, 3(4): 185-19 1, 1988.
P. Ladkin.
Models of axioms for time intervals.
In Proc.
AAAI'87, pages 234-239, 1987.
D. McDermott.
A temporal logic for reasoning about processes and plans.
Cognitive Scaence, 6:lOl-155, 1982.
T. Nishida and S .
Doshita.
ReasoninK about discontinuous change.
In Proc.
AAAI'8fpages 643648, 1987.
E. Schwalb, K. Kask, and R. Dechter.
Temporal reasoning with constraints on fluents and events.
In Proc.
AAAI'94, 1994.
Y. Shoham.
Temporal logics in AI: Semantical and ontological considerations.
Artificial Intelligence, 33:89-104, 1987.
J .
van Benthem.
The Logzc of Time.
Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1983.
L. Vila.
I P An instant-period-based theory of time.
In R. Rodriguez, editor, Proc.
ECAI'94 Workshop on Spatial and Temporal Reasoning, 1994.
[23] L. Vila.
On Temporal Representation and Reasonang in Knowledge-based Systems.
PhD Thesis on Computer Science, Dept.
of Computer Languages and Systems, Technical University of Catalonia, C/ Pau Gargallo 5, 08028 Barcelona, 1994.
[24] L. Vila and H. Reichgelt.
The token reification approach t o temporal reasoning.
Artzficzal Inteldzgence, 82, (to appear) 1996.
[25] B. C. Williams.
Doing time: Putting qualitative reasoning on firmer ground.
In Proc.
AAAI'86, pages 105-112,1986.
28  HoLDS&(relay = closed,p) A A OCCURS,t(open(rehy), end(p)) + j HoLDS&(Telay = open),$) A Heets(p,p') HOLDS&(relay = closed,p) A A OCCURS,t(close(relay), end(p)) j HoLDs&(re[ay = closed),p') A Heets(p,p') HOLDS(signal = low, p ) A onA HOLDS,~(QBA2 qz,end(p)) j OCCURS,t(tunz-on( signal), end(p))  +  *