About the Temporal Decrease of Sets Bernhard Heinemann Fachbereich Informatik, FernUniversitat Hagen D-58084 Hagen, Germany Bernhard.Heinemann@ fernuni-hagen.de  Abstract This paper is about a simple general framework for modelling decrease.
We provide an extension of propositional linear timetemporal logic with operators expressing 'nexttime' and 'henceforth', by a modality that quantQies over the points of some set X .
This set changes in the course of time; actually, X is assumed to shrink little by little.
We develop an appropriate logical language, give a sound and complete axiomatization of the set of validities, and prove decidability of this set.
Moreovel; the computational complexity of the logic is determined.
1  .
.
Introduction  At TIME-00 we presented a formalism modelling qualitatively the notion of change of some set in the course of time; cf [12].
Although having nice computational properties that system lacks sufficient expressiveness.
This deficiency is overcome by the present paper, at least concerning decrease.
We actually provide a generalization of propositional linear time temporal logic where the transition between states is replaced by gradual shrinking of a given set.
To put such shrinking procedures in concrete terms one may think of the development of knowledge of an agent.
For convenience, we briefly remind the reader of the relevance of this to computer science: The notion of knowledge has proved to be quite useful in modelling distributed systems; cf [9] and [4], e.g.
The knowledge of an agent involved in such a system is represented by the set of alternatives the agent considers possible at any time.
Actually, this set called the agent's knowledge state shrinks in the course of time in case the system is vnchronous and the agents have pe$ect recall; as to the latter notions cf also the recent paper U].
In usual logic of knowledge and time it is presupposed that runs of systems are functions defined on N,i.e., infinite in particular.
As a consequence one gets that, from a 'global' point of view, the actual knowledge state of an  0-7695-1107-4/01 $10.00 0 2001 E E E  agent splits up in a tree-like manner step by step.
In this paper, however, we take a 'local'point of view describingonly the shnnlting of the agent's knowledge state.
This leads to a chain structure of the sets involved.
We clearly have to require then runs to be partial.
We believe that our approach is not only interesting in connection with knowledge, but also in other contexts.
For instance, the proposed system is basically a contribution to pure temporal logic.
Moreover, it belongs to 'topological modal logic' in a sense; cf [6],[2].
Finally, it could provide the core of a temporal reasoning formalism; see corresponing remarks in the introduction to [12].
We now get to the details of our logic.
First, we present the underlying language.
Afterwards we axiomatize the set of theorems of the logic.
in Section 3, where also semantical completeness of the given axiomatizationis proved; this takes up the main part of the paper.
The final technical section is devoted to discussing effectiveness properties of the proposed system.
We assume acquaintance of the reader with basic modal and temporal logic.
All that we need is contained in the standard textbooks; cf [I], [5] and [8], for instance.
2  The Language  From a technical point of view we essentially link the well-known modal system S5 with propositionallinear time temporal1 logic involving the operators nexttime and henceforth.
The type of this combination is determined by our goals viz.
describing steadily decreasing sets formally, and is reflected in a couple of peculiar axiom schemata.
Thus, three non-boolean connectives will be present in our language: a location operator L addressing points inside the set being under discourse (or rather the 'universal' dual K of L), a shrinking operator IXI modellinggradual decrease, and an operator U intended to capture the reflexive and transitive closure of El.
In order to define the set WFF of well-formed formulas of the logical language we let PV = {p, q, T , .
.
.}
be an enumerable set of propositional variables.
Designating  234  ( iflEIand  formulas by lower case Greek letters the set WFF is determined by the followingrecursive conditions then:  Concerning the duals of the modalities, we let  for all p E PV and CY,p E WFF.
In case x , Vi  are treated as Moreover, the boolean operators V and abbreviations.
We define the semantics of our language next.
As we would like to treat the decrease of a given set X, certain subsets of X have to be considered in the formal model.
Consequently, we take X and the system of those subsets, 0,as basic ingredientsof the domains with respect to which formulas are shortly to be interpreted.
However, the set 0 carries a time structure which is made explicit by the following definition.
- Subsequently, let P ( A ) denote the powerset of a given set A.
-+  +M  In this section we first present a list of schemata aimed  at providing a sound and complete axiomatizationof all the formulas which are valid in every model based on a flow of decreasing sets.
The schemata are divided into three groups, called m'oms of location, time, and decrease, respectively.
Secondly, we sketch the crucial steps of the completeness proof of the logical system S determined by these schemata and the usual rules modus ponens and necessitation.
e  -  Axioms of location: instances { propositional tautologies All  2.
Let S = ( X ,d ) be a flow of decreasing sets and V : PV P ( X ) a mapping.
Then V is called a valuation, and the triple M := ( X ,d , V ) is called a model (based on S).
('1)  (L2) (L3) (L4)  (L5)  Notice that 'the future includes the present', i.e., the ordering of time is reflexive, as it is common in computer science.
We are going to evaluate formulas in models at situations of a flow of decreasing sets, ( X , d ) .
Such situations are simply pairs x , Ui satisfying x E Ui = d ( i ) , where i E I; these pairs are designated without brackets.
Definition 2.2 Let be given a model M = ( X ,d , V ) and a situation x , Ui of the flow of sets which M is based on.
Then we define  iff  x,uikM~a @  {{  x , vi k  of  K ( a -+ p) -+ ( K a 4 K P ) K a -+a Ka-+KKa Lcu-+KLa  e  Axioms of time:  e  Axioms of decrease: (01) (02)  FM a A 0  is satisfied we say that Q holds in  Axioms  3  Definition2.1 1.
Let X be a non-empty set, ( I ,5 ) an initial segment of (N,S ) , and d an order-reversing mapping from ( I ,5 ) into P ( X ) .
Then S := ( X ,d ) is called a flow of decreasing sets.
x , Vi  cy  M at the situation x,Vi;moreover, the formula a E WFF is said to be valid in M, iff it holds in M at every situation.
K E CY B K a IXIKa-tKIXIaVIXIP -+  While the schemata of the first two groups are wellknown, the third group of axioms is the decisive one.
Here the interactionof the modal connectives involved in the system is described.
( 0 1 ) is the real 'axiom of shrinking' and is typical of the various systems of topological reasoning;  MP  VyEUi: Y7ui k M a  235  see [2].
( 0 2 ) is responsible for the linear structure of flows of decreasing sets.
The effect of this axiom is discussed more detailedly below.
In the paper [lo], the chain property of the distinguished set of subsets of a given set has been expressed by the schema  (*) K IXI (a + Lp) v K IXI (p  --f  La).
As follows from our completeness theorem below, this schema is S-derivable.
We state the soundness of the system S with respect to the intended semantic domains as our first result.
Figure 1.
Modijed cross properry  Proposition 3.1 Let a!
E WFF be an S-denvable formula.
Then a!
is valid in everyflow of decreasing sets.
From (,hetransitivity of the relation 0 0 (-1, G-7  We now point out the crucial steps proving semantic completeness of S. Clearly, we use the canonical model 0 Mcm of S. Let , 0 and L denote the accessibility relations of M,,, belonging to the connectives [XI, 0 and K , respectively.
The above axioms then provide for the required properties of these relations.
It is well-known from L basic modal and temporal logic (see [SI, 39, e.g.)
that is 0 0 an equivalencerelation, is partially functional, and is reflexive and transitive.
Maybe it is less known that for all 0 L -4 -U points s, t , U of the canonical model such that s-  -- -  Oa ++  O there exists a point v such that s L v -U; this is valid because of (01)and is called the cross property.
L Let denote the -equivalence class of a point s of M,,,.
Define a binary relation + on the set of all such equivalence classes by  -  [SI  [SI  [SI, t' E such that s' %'.
there are s'  + [t]: *  E  Proposition 3 3  IF O(0LY --+  p) v O ( 0 P + a )  We now introduce a suitable filtration of the submodel MI of PvI,,, which is generated by a point SO containing the negation LY of a given non-derivable formula y.
Let sf(a) denote the set of subformulas of a.
Then certain finite sets of formulas are defined as follows: ro := {sop I op E qa)}  ra r r-  .there exists a point x such that O s -x  O a ) -+ a ) -+ (OUa + O a )  -  0 and s-+v  O  --f  2.
Also, the schema L guaranteeing weak connectedness 0 of the relation is S-derivable:  We mention the following modijied cross property corresponding with Axiom (02), for later purposes: for all s, t , U , v such that -U  ma  1.
The schema Dum is S-derivable:  Ik U ( O ( a  [t]  Proposition 3.2 The relation + is partially functional.
L -+t  we infer  represents an axiom, but it turns out that they are even provable withi the aid of the weaker schema (T2).- We designate S-dtxivability ' I I- ' .
The following fact about + was proved in [lo], Proposition 3.5, using the schema (*).
But, the schema ( 0 2 ) in connection with (572) is also sufficient for this.
.s  0  where (.
.
.
)* designates the reflexive and transitive closure.
In order lo establish equality here, the method of filtration has to be used.
By means of the following derivabilities it can be guaranteed that passing to a filtration does not violate the relevant semantic properties.
It is well-known (see [SI, [4]) that all these formulas are theorems of ordinary linear time temporal logic where the schema  --  -  -  L  -U;  see Figure 1.
It turns out that this property.
which is valid on the canonical model in particular, can be transmitted to certain Bltrations.
p - p I mp E ro U sf(a)) ro u rM  := sf(&)u :=  ru{+IpEr}  {  r' joined with the set of all finite conjunctions of distinct elements of r'  r A  :=  rL -  :=  { ~ p ~ p ~ r ~ }  :=  rAurL.
r  236  :=  -  The special f o F of these sets facilitates the subsequent results.
Note that I' is in fact finite and closed under subformulas.
For all points s, t of MI, we let s - t : u  literally to the present case.
It deals with a meticulous analysis of the clusters of the relation 0'and a related one, respectively, in which (1) and (2) of Proposition 3.3 are used decisively; see [SI, 9.1 1 and 9.12, for the details.
So, we may now proceed to the real peculiarities of the system S. Subsequently, we exclusively use the minimal filtration of the relation 0 , which we designate 0 .
We  -  snF=tnF.
Moreover, we let S designate the --equiv$ence class of s, and C the set of all such classes.
Since I' is finite, is a finite set as well.
So far we have formed a filtration of the carrier set of M'.
Next we introduce filtrations of the accessibility relations of this model (which actually are the restrictions of the accessibility relations of Mean).
For convenience of the reader, we repeat the definition of this notion for the present case.
Let A be a modal operator (i.e., A = K, El, or U) and V its dual.
Then, a binary relation on C is called  c  also consider only the minimal filtration of L  -t  0  s L t i m p l i e s (0 I  -  Lemma 3.6 tion.
E s n F)  L  is an equivalence rela-  2.
Suppose that we have S&f.U.
t.  s -vL  -  I%  ing lemma gives the precise circumstances surrounding our previous remark that the accessibility relation corresponding with 0 represents the reflexive and transitive closure of the accessibility relation corresponding with IXI.
-  Lemma 3.4 The relation 0'is aJiltration of the relation  -  This is Goldblatt's 'Ancestral Lemma' 9.8 in [SI; regarding the modifications caused by the partiality of 0 , the proof of 3.4 can be done analogously.
The appropriate version of the 'Fun-Lemma' 9.9 in [SI, reads as follows.
Lemma 3.5 Let +% be the minimalJiltration of the relacion -.0 Suppose that IXIp E r, and let s, t be points of the model M' such that S &E  1.
The relation  Then there m'sts a point v of M' such that  Let the relation 0 on C be a filtration of -.0 Let designate the transitive closure of 0 .
Then the follow-  -.0  0 and -.L  property is valid with respect to  implies s LE;  s  -  of the set r, H is an equivalence relation and the cross  a F-Jiltration of .%, iff the following two conditions are satisfied for all points s, t of M': 0  , from now  on.
This relation is denoted A.Due to the special choice  a  V  L  - 0 -U.
---  A proof of the lemma can be found in the paper [ 113.
While Lemma 3.5 enables us to select an arbitrary 0 successor of the --class Sunder consideration without loss of any semantic property concerning the formula a, we actually need a further, formally similar assertion: we have L to be able to select a suitable successor of the whole equivalence class of S , at least as far as the realization of IXI-formulas contained in I' is concerned.
That this faithfully is possible can be guaranteed by the following variant of the mod@ed cross property involving the schema ( 0 2 ) (and going beyond the issues of [ 111 thus).
Proposition 3.7 Suppose that S  and 3 -tL  0 -L  S -z  -  Note that functionalityof the relation 0 is lost by passing to a filtration in general.
Lemma 3.5 represents a corresponding substitute.
Some rather technical part in the completeness proof of propositional linear time temporal logic can be transferred  .
237  -u  is valid for the --classes 8, 5, U, V. Furthermore, assume that for some formula lxlp E I' it holds that IXIp E s. Then there exists a --class 3 such that  Then IXIp E s, @p E t.  Clearly, the proof of Lemma 3.5 requires Axiom (T2).
- 0 -  -U.
-  Proof.
Let IXIp be an element of s n I?.
Due to the second filtration condition we have that IXI+ $ s' whenever s' s, since otherwise we would get ,O E U and -$E U. Consequently, Op E s' for all such points SI.
From f +%U we conclude that there are t' E f and U' E  -  U such that t' %d.
Because of the appropriate definition  -  --  Proposition 3.8 For all p E f and 8 E  of the set f we can find a point s' s of the model M' such that t' L s'.
We infer s' L t' O U', since the N  ("73)  relation 4, is symmetrical.
As Op E s', there exists an 0 +-successor of s'.
But then, the modified cross property  -O  applies yielding a point x such that s' follows that S  .&G.
x  L  U'.
The proposition can be proved by structural induction.
The cases p = EUR47 and p = Oy are the critical ones.
In the first ciL.e 3.7 and 3.5 have to be applied.
For the second case certain matters related to the remark following Lemma 3.5 are relevant.
To eventually get the desired model based on a flow of decreasing sets, we now use the same techniques as in the completeness proof for topological nexttime logic; see [101, Section 3.
This model gets carrier set a suitable space of functions over (To be more precise, we take all 0 'paths through M '.)
Furthermore, a function f belongs to the i-th subset iff f(i) exists, for all i E N. By means of an appropriate truth lemma, see 3.8 of [lo], the first of our main results follows:  It  This proves the proposition.
U  v  where is induced by the distinguished valuation of the canonical model.
As we have shown above, M is a filtration of the model M'.
Thus  -  Theorem 3.9 Let y E WFF be a formula.
Then y is Sderivable, i f f y is valid in every flow of decreasing sets.
classes, as indicated above.
Let [SI denote the equivalence class of 8.
Define a relation F on the set of all such classes by  4  Effectiveness Properties  First in this section we sketch how decidability of the set of S-theorems can be obtained.
Afterwards we determine the complexity of the corresponding satisjabilityproblem.
The above completeness proof does not obviously yield the finite model property of our logic; so, we have to proceed diffiaently in order to achieve this result.
Some prerequisite notions are introduced below.
there are s' E [SI , t' E [E]  at'.
The first class we choose is [ sg 1.
The selection of the successor class of the current one is in accordance with Proposition 3.7: Given [ 31, we choose, if possible, any Fsuccessor [ f] # [ S ] of [ S ] such that whenever some formula Kip E r is valid at some point of ?
E [ s ] and s' is extendable at all, then this formula is 'realized' at some 0 --successor 3 of s' contained in [ f].
Because of 3.7 we have in fact taken into account all such formulas from r then.
After a finite number of steps the procedure does not make any headway, or reaches a class processed already.
In the latter case we are finished.
Otherwise we unwind the O* last (and possibly only non-simple) --clusters contained in the last class simultaneously, just as in propositional linear time temporal logic.
0 of During the construction we 'forget' those --arrows M which do not point to the class chosen at a time; additionally, points not belonging to any of the selected classes may be forgotten afterwards as well.
Designating the resulting (Kripke) model  -  c'.
holds for all points s of M' and formulas p contained in ?;.
L We are going to select a 'chain' of -equivalence  such that s'  (MJ) I=@  l=P  is valid.
Consider the structure  [ s ] F [ t ]: *  c',  Definition 4.1 Let Z := ( I ,5 ) be an initial segment of (M,5).
1.
A subset 0 # I' C I is called a segment of Z, iff there is no i E I \ I' strictly between any two elements of I'.
2.
A partition of I into segments is called a segmentation of 2-. .
Let be: given a formula a and a model M = (X,d, V ) based on a flow of decreasing sets.
We will have to consider segmentations of Z = (I, where I is the domain of d, such thal the truth value of a remains unaltered on every segment, in the following sense.
s),  Definitioa4.2 Let a E WFF be a formula and M = ( X ,d , V )a model based on aflow of decreasing sets.
Furthermore, let A be an indexing set and P := {Zx I X E A} a segmentation ofZ = ( I ,5).
Then a is called stable on P, ifffor all X E A and x E X we have  + a for all i E Zx such that x E U,, or x,U, + ~a for all i E Zx such that x E U,.
.E,  we obtain:  238  U,  It tums out that we can always get afinite segmentation of Z on which a is stable.
Proposition 4 3 Let M = ( X ,d, V ) ,Z and Q be as above.
Then there exists a finite segmentation Pa := 1 1 1 , .
.
.,Zn} of Z such that a is stable on  Pa. Moreovel; Pa can be  chosen such that it refines Pp for every subformula fl of a.
In fact, the segmentation Pa can be constructed by induction on the structure of formulas starting with the trivial segmentation {I}in case Q is a propositional variable (mind Axiom (TO)).
According to Proposition 4.3 the question whether a given formula a is satisfiable can be reduced to models of 'finite depth'.
By a standard procedure of the logic of set spaces this question can then be whittled down to models which are of 'finite width' additionally; cf [7], 3.35, e.g.
This eventually yields the finite model property, which implies the claimed decidabilityresult.
References [l] P. Blackburn, M. de Rijke, and Y.Venema.
Modal Logic.
Forthcoming (preprint web-available).
121 A. Dabrowski, L. S .
Moss, and R. Parikh.
Topological Reasoning and The Logic of Knowledge.
Annals of Pure and AppliedLogic, 78:73-110,1996.
[3] C. Dixon and M. Fisher.
Clausal Resolution for Logics of Time and Knowledge with Synchrony and Perfect Recall.
In International Conference on Temporal Logic 2000, pages 43-52, Leipzig, October 2000.
University of Leipzig.
141 R. Fagin, J. Y. Halpem, Y. Moses, and M. Y. Vardi.
Reasoning about Knowledge.
MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.
), 1995.
[5] D. M. Gabbay, I. Hodkinson, and M. Reynolds.
Temporal  Theorem 4.4 The set offormulas Q E WFF being valid in every model, is decidable.
A careful analysis of the proof of Proposition 4.3, i.e., counting segments carefully along the tree structure of Q and thereby utilizing the S.5-properties of K , yields the following strengthening of that assertion.
Logic: Mathematical Foundations and Computational Aspects, volume 28 of Oxford Logic Guides.
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994.
[6] K. Georgatos.
Knowledge Theoretic Properties of Topological Spaces.
In M. Masuch and L. Polos, editors, Knowl-  Proposition 4.5 The segmentation Pa can be chosen such that the number of segments is polynomial in the length of a.  edge Representation and Uncertainty, volume 808 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 147-159.
Springer, 1994.
[7] K. Georgatos.
Knowledge on Treelike Spaces.
Studia Logica, 59271-301,1997.
[SI R. Goldblatt.
Logics of Time and Computation,volume 7 of CSLI Lecture Notes.
Center for the Study of Language and Information,Stanford.
second edition, 1992.
[9] J. Y. Halpern and Y. Moses.
Knowledge and Common Knowledge in a Distributed Environment.
Journal of the ACM, 37~549-587,1990.
[lo] B. Heinemann.
TopologicalNexttime Logic.
In M. Kracht, M. de Rijke, H. Wansing, and M. Zakharyawhev, editors, Advances in Modal Logic I , volume 87 of CSLZ Publications, pages 99-113, Stanford,CA, 1998.
Kluwer.
[ll] B. Heinemann.
Temporal Aspects of the Modal Logic of Subset Spaces.
Theoretical Computer Science, 224(12):135-155,1999.
[12] B. Heinemann.
Extending Topological Nexttime Logic.
In S .
D. Goodwin and A. Trudel, editors, TemporalRepresenta-  Finally.
the linearity of flows of decreasing sets plays its part once again, among other things.
We obtain that the satisfiability problem of our logic is NP-complete.
In view of [13], Theorem 4.1, this result is somewhat surprising at first glance, according to the presence of the temporal operators.
However, the axioms (TO) and ( 0 2 ) are responsible for brealung down the complexity.
Theorem 4.6 The set of formulas a E WFF satisfiable at some situation of some model, is NP-complete.
5  fact, enriching S by that operator is relatively easy, i.e., goes on as in ordinary temporal logic (see [SI, SS 9), and does not change the issues of this paper.
Future work will be concerned with elaborating a temporal logic of change, in order to obtain the desired strengthening of the system studied in [ 121.
One has to treat the case of growth separately and add suitable axioms of change.
Maybe the corresponding axiom of the paper [12] works for this more general setting as well.
Concluding Remarks  We have provided a logical framework modelling the temporal decrease of sets qualitatively.
Our results include soundness, completeness, decidability and complexity of the proposed logical system.
The reader might wonder why the unril-operator has not been considered presently, which really makes up the full expressive power of propositional linear time temporal logic.
The only reason for this is to be brief as far as features of the standard systems involved are concerned.
In  tion and Reasoning, 7th International Workshop,TIME-00, pages 87-94, Los Alamitos, Ca., 2000.
IEEE Computer Society Press.
[13] A. P. Sistla and E. M. Clarke.
The Complexity of PropositionalLinear Temporal Logics.
Journal ofthe ACM, 32733749,1985.
239